#separator:tab
#html:true
#columns:Sentence	Label	Aspect	Formula	MainUse	QuickCue	Contrast	Tags
She eats an apple every day.	Present Simple	simple	base verb / 3rd person singular -s	habit or routine	every day; eats	Not present continuous, because this is a regular habit, not an action happening right now.	present-simple routine affirmative core recognition
He does not drink coffee in the morning.	Present Simple	simple	do/does not + base verb	routine negative	does not drink; in the morning	Not present continuous; this describes a usual pattern, not a temporary situation.	present-simple routine negative core recognition
Do you know the answer?	Present Simple	simple	do/does + base verb	state verb in the present	Do you know	Not present continuous; stative verbs like know are usually not used for ongoing action here.	present-simple stative question core recognition
Where does she work?	Present Simple	simple	do/does + base verb	general fact or usual situation	does she work	Not present continuous; the question asks about her usual workplace, not what she is doing right now.	present-simple general-fact question core recognition
Water boils at 100°C.	Present Simple	simple	base verb	general truth	boils	Not present continuous; scientific facts are normally expressed with the present simple.	present-simple general-truth affirmative core recognition
She is reading a book now.	Present Continuous	progressive	am/is/are + verb-ing	action happening now	is reading; now	Not present simple; the sentence focuses on an action in progress at the moment of speaking.	present-continuous in-progress affirmative core recognition
They are not watching the movie.	Present Continuous	progressive	am/is/are not + verb-ing	ongoing negative action	are not watching	Not present simple; this describes what is happening at the present moment.	present-continuous in-progress negative core recognition
Is he working late tonight?	Present Continuous	progressive	am/is/are + subject + verb-ing	arranged or ongoing near-present action	Is he working; tonight	Not present simple; this asks about a specific current or arranged situation.	present-continuous question core recognition
What are you doing right now?	Present Continuous	progressive	am/is/are + verb-ing	action in progress	are you doing; right now	Not present simple; the question is about an activity currently in progress.	present-continuous in-progress question core recognition
She is staying with her aunt this week.	Present Continuous	progressive	am/is/are + verb-ing	temporary situation around now	is staying; this week	Not present simple; this is temporary, not her normal permanent living situation.	present-continuous temporary affirmative core recognition
She has visited Paris several times.	Present Perfect	perfective	have/has + past participle	past experience with present relevance	has visited; several times	Not past simple; no finished past time is given, and the focus is life experience up to now.	present-perfect experience affirmative core recognition
They have not finished the work yet.	Present Perfect	perfective	have/has not + past participle	unfinished action with present relevance	have not finished; yet	Not past simple; yet links the unfinished result to the present.	present-perfect unfinished negative core recognition
Has he seen the new film?	Present Perfect	perfective	have/has + subject + past participle	completed action relevant now	Has he seen	Not past simple; the speaker cares about the present result of his experience.	present-perfect question core recognition
How many times have you traveled abroad?	Present Perfect	perfective	have/has + past participle	counting experiences up to now	have you traveled; how many times	Not past simple; the question asks about life experience, not one finished time period.	present-perfect experience question core recognition
I have lost my keys.	Present Perfect	perfective	have/has + past participle	recent action with present result	have lost	Not past simple; the important idea is the present result: I do not have the keys now.	present-perfect result affirmative core recognition
She has been studying for hours.	Present Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	have/has been + verb-ing	action continuing up to now with emphasis on duration	has been studying; for hours	Not present perfect simple; the sentence emphasizes duration and ongoing activity.	present-perfect-continuous duration affirmative recognition
They have not been exercising lately.	Present Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	have/has not been + verb-ing	repeated or ongoing activity up to now, in the negative	have not been exercising; lately	Not present continuous; lately connects the time period from the recent past up to now.	present-perfect-continuous duration negative recognition
Has he been waiting long?	Present Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	have/has been + verb-ing	ongoing action with duration up to now	has he been waiting; long	Not present continuous; the question includes duration leading up to the present.	present-perfect-continuous duration question recognition
What have you been doing all day?	Present Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	have/has been + verb-ing	activity continuing through a period up to now	have you been doing; all day	Not present continuous; all day extends the action from earlier until now.	present-perfect-continuous duration question recognition
I have been working here since June.	Present Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	have/has been + verb-ing	activity started in the past and still continuing	have been working; since June	Not past continuous; the activity began earlier and continues to the present.	present-perfect-continuous since-duration affirmative recognition
She walked to the store yesterday.	Past Simple	simple	past form of verb	completed action at a finished past time	walked; yesterday	Not present perfect; yesterday is a finished past-time marker.	past-simple finished-time affirmative core recognition
He did not call me last night.	Past Simple	simple	did not + base verb	completed past negative	did not call; last night	Not present perfect; last night is a finished past time.	past-simple finished-time negative core recognition
Did you finish the report?	Past Simple	simple	did + base verb	completed past action	Did you finish	Not present perfect; the question asks about a completed past event.	past-simple question core recognition
When did she leave the house?	Past Simple	simple	did + base verb	completed past action at a definite time	did she leave; when	Not past perfect; there is no earlier-than-another-past-event meaning here.	past-simple question core recognition
I saw him two weeks ago.	Past Simple	simple	past form of verb	completed action at a definite past time	saw; two weeks ago	Not present perfect; two weeks ago fixes the event in finished past time.	past-simple finished-time affirmative core recognition
She was cooking when I arrived.	Past Continuous	progressive	was/were + verb-ing	ongoing past action interrupted by another action	was cooking; when I arrived	Not past simple; the form highlights the background action in progress.	past-continuous interrupted affirmative core recognition
They were not talking during the movie.	Past Continuous	progressive	was/were not + verb-ing	ongoing negative situation in the past	were not talking; during the movie	Not past simple; the sentence describes an extended situation over a period.	past-continuous duration negative core recognition
Was he sleeping at that time?	Past Continuous	progressive	was/were + subject + verb-ing	action in progress at a past moment	Was he sleeping; at that time	Not past simple; the focus is what was in progress at that moment.	past-continuous question core recognition
What were you thinking about?	Past Continuous	progressive	was/were + verb-ing	ongoing mental activity in the past	were you thinking	Not past simple; the speaker asks about an activity in progress in the past.	past-continuous question core recognition
At eight o’clock, we were driving home.	Past Continuous	progressive	was/were + verb-ing	action in progress at a specific past time	were driving; at eight o’clock	Not past simple; the sentence zooms in on an action underway at that time.	past-continuous specific-time affirmative core recognition
She had finished the task before lunch.	Past Perfect	perfective	had + past participle	action completed before another past reference point	had finished; before lunch	Not past simple; the sentence looks back from a later past point.	past-perfect earlier-past affirmative recognition
They had not eaten before the meeting.	Past Perfect	perfective	had not + past participle	negative earlier-than-past action	had not eaten; before the meeting	Not past simple; the meeting is the later past reference point.	past-perfect earlier-past negative recognition
Had he left before you arrived?	Past Perfect	perfective	had + subject + past participle	completed action before another past event	Had he left; before you arrived	Not past simple; the question compares two past moments.	past-perfect earlier-past question recognition
Why had she gone home early?	Past Perfect	perfective	had + past participle	past action completed before another implied past moment	had she gone	Not past simple; the speaker is looking back from a later past context.	past-perfect earlier-past question recognition
By the time the movie started, we had found our seats.	Past Perfect	perfective	had + past participle	completed before another past action	had found; by the time the movie started	Not past simple; one event clearly happened before the later past event.	past-perfect earlier-past affirmative recognition
She had been waiting for an hour before he came.	Past Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	had been + verb-ing	ongoing activity before another past event, with duration	had been waiting; for an hour before he came	Not past perfect simple; the sentence emphasizes duration before the later past event.	past-perfect-continuous duration affirmative recognition
They had not been practicing enough.	Past Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	had not been + verb-ing	ongoing or repeated activity before a past point, negative	had not been practicing	Not past continuous; the meaning reaches back from a later past context.	past-perfect-continuous negative recognition
Had he been traveling before that?	Past Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	had been + subject + verb-ing	ongoing activity before a past reference point	Had he been traveling; before that	Not past continuous; before that places the activity earlier than a past point.	past-perfect-continuous question recognition
How long had you been living there?	Past Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	had been + verb-ing	duration up to a past reference point	had you been living; how long	Not past continuous; the question is about duration leading up to a past moment.	past-perfect-continuous duration question recognition
Before the manager arrived, the team had been working for hours.	Past Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	had been + verb-ing	activity continuing up to another past event	had been working; for hours; before the manager arrived	Not past perfect simple; the emphasis is on the ongoing duration of the activity.	past-perfect-continuous duration affirmative recognition
She will call you tomorrow.	Future Simple	simple	will + base verb	future action or prediction	will call; tomorrow	Not present simple; the sentence refers to a future event.	future-will-simple affirmative core recognition
He will not attend the event.	Future Simple	simple	will not + base verb	future negative	will not attend	Not present simple; the action is located in the future.	future-will-simple negative core recognition
Will you join us for dinner?	Future Simple	simple	will + subject + base verb	future question	Will you join	Not present continuous; the speaker is asking about a future action.	future-will-simple question core recognition
When will the train arrive?	Future Simple	simple	will + base verb	future event	will the train arrive	Not present simple; arrival is being placed in the future.	future-will-simple question core recognition
I think it will rain later.	Future Simple	simple	will + base verb	prediction	will rain; later	Not present continuous; this is a prediction rather than an action in progress now.	future-will-simple prediction affirmative core recognition
She will be traveling next week.	Future Continuous	progressive	will be + verb-ing	ongoing action at a future time	will be traveling; next week	Not future simple; the sentence emphasizes the action as ongoing over a future period.	future-will-continuous affirmative recognition
They will not be attending the conference.	Future Continuous	progressive	will not be + verb-ing	ongoing future negative	will not be attending	Not future simple; the progressive form highlights an ongoing future activity.	future-will-continuous negative recognition
Will he be working tomorrow?	Future Continuous	progressive	will + subject + be + verb-ing	action in progress at a future time	Will he be working; tomorrow	Not present continuous; the time frame is future.	future-will-continuous question recognition
What will you be doing at 8 PM?	Future Continuous	progressive	will be + verb-ing	ongoing future action at a specific time	will you be doing; at 8 PM	Not future simple; the question asks about an activity in progress at a future moment.	future-will-continuous question recognition
This time tomorrow, we will be flying over the ocean.	Future Continuous	progressive	will be + verb-ing	action in progress at a specific future moment	will be flying; this time tomorrow	Not future simple; the speaker views the action as ongoing at that future point.	future-will-continuous specific-time affirmative recognition
She will have completed the project by Friday.	Future Perfect	perfective	will have + past participle	action completed before a future deadline	will have completed; by Friday	Not future simple; the sentence focuses on completion before a future point.	future-will-perfect affirmative recognition
They will not have arrived by then.	Future Perfect	perfective	will not have + past participle	non-completion before a future point	will not have arrived; by then	Not future continuous; the focus is completion, not ongoing activity.	future-will-perfect negative recognition
Will he have finished the book by tomorrow?	Future Perfect	perfective	will + subject + have + past participle	question about completion before a future point	Will he have finished; by tomorrow	Not present perfect; the reference point is in the future, not now.	future-will-perfect question recognition
How many tasks will you have done by the end?	Future Perfect	perfective	will have + past participle	amount completed by a future point	will you have done; by the end	Not future simple; the focus is on results completed before a deadline.	future-will-perfect question recognition
By next month, I will have lived here for ten years.	Future Perfect	perfective	will have + past participle	state reaching a completed measure by a future point	will have lived; by next month; for ten years	Not present perfect; the measuring point is in the future.	future-will-perfect duration affirmative recognition
She will have been living here for years by next month.	Future Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	will have been + verb-ing	ongoing duration up to a future point	will have been living; for years; by next month	Not future perfect simple; the sentence emphasizes duration up to that future point.	future-will-perfect-continuous duration affirmative recognition
They will not have been waiting long.	Future Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	will not have been + verb-ing	negative duration up to a future point	will not have been waiting long	Not future continuous; the sentence measures duration up to a later point.	future-will-perfect-continuous negative recognition
Will he have been studying all night?	Future Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	will + subject + have been + verb-ing	question about duration up to a future point	Will he have been studying; all night	Not present perfect continuous; the reference point is future.	future-will-perfect-continuous question recognition
How long will you have been working here by then?	Future Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	will have been + verb-ing	duration leading up to a future reference point	will you have been working; by then	Not future perfect simple; the emphasis is on ongoing duration.	future-will-perfect-continuous duration question recognition
By noon, the engineers will have been testing the system for six hours.	Future Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	will have been + verb-ing	activity continuing for a length of time up to a future point	will have been testing; for six hours; by noon	Not future continuous; the sentence measures duration up to a future deadline.	future-will-perfect-continuous duration affirmative recognition
If I were you, I would wait a little longer.	Conditional Simple	simple	would + base verb	advice in a hypothetical situation	If I were you; would wait	Not future with will; this is a common hypothetical conditional pattern.	conditional-simple advice affirmative recognition
Look at those clouds. It is going to rain.	Be Going To	intentional	am/is/are going to + base verb	prediction based on present evidence	Look at those clouds; is going to rain	This focuses on evidence visible now, not a neutral prediction with will.	recognition future-going-to prediction evidence core
We are going to repaint the kitchen this weekend.	Be Going To	intentional	am/is/are going to + base verb	prior intention or plan	are going to repaint; this weekend	This suggests an existing plan rather than a decision made this second.	recognition future-going-to intention core
Are you going to apply for that job?	Be Going To	intentional	am/is/are + subject + going to + base verb	asking about an intended future action	Are you going to apply	The question is about a plan or intention, not a present activity.	recognition future-going-to question core
They are not going to sell the house after all.	Be Going To	intentional	am/is/are not going to + base verb	negative future plan or intention	are not going to sell	The speaker refers to a decided future plan, not a simple future prediction.	recognition future-going-to negative core
I am meeting Sara for lunch tomorrow.	Present Continuous for Future Arrangement	progressive	am/is/are + verb-ing	fixed personal arrangement in the future	am meeting; tomorrow	This is a scheduled personal arrangement, not an action happening right now.	recognition present-continuous-future arrangement core
We are flying to Berlin on Monday.	Present Continuous for Future Arrangement	progressive	am/is/are + verb-ing	planned travel arrangement	are flying; on Monday	The form signals a personal plan already arranged, not merely a prediction.	recognition present-continuous-future travel core
Is he seeing the dentist this afternoon?	Present Continuous for Future Arrangement	progressive	am/is/are + subject + verb-ing	asking about a scheduled arrangement	Is he seeing; this afternoon	Here seeing means meeting as an arrangement, not the stative verb of perception.	recognition present-continuous-future question core
She is not working tomorrow because she has a hospital appointment.	Present Continuous for Future Arrangement	progressive	am/is/are not + verb-ing	negative future arrangement	is not working; tomorrow	The sentence refers to an arranged future schedule, not a present temporary situation.	recognition present-continuous-future negative core
The train leaves at 6:10 tomorrow morning.	Present Simple for Schedule	simple	base verb / 3rd person singular -s	timetable or fixed schedule	leaves at 6:10 tomorrow morning	Present simple is common for public schedules and timetables.	recognition present-simple-schedule timetable core
The meeting starts at nine sharp.	Present Simple for Schedule	simple	base verb / 3rd person singular -s	official scheduled event	starts at nine sharp	This refers to an official schedule rather than a personal arrangement.	recognition present-simple-schedule event core
What time does the museum open on Sundays?	Present Simple for Schedule	simple	do/does + base verb	asking about a timetable	does the museum open on Sundays	The question is about a regular public schedule, not a temporary plan.	recognition present-simple-schedule question core
The semester does not begin until late September.	Present Simple for Schedule	simple	do/does not + base verb	negative timetable statement	does not begin until late September	The meaning is based on a fixed calendar schedule rather than intention.	recognition present-simple-schedule negative core
If you heat water to 100 degrees, it boils.	Zero Conditional	zero	if + present simple, present simple	general truth or scientific fact	If you heat; it boils	The zero conditional states always-true results, using present simple in both clauses.	recognition conditional-zero fact core
Water expands if you freeze it.	Zero Conditional	zero	present simple, if + present simple	general truth	expands if you freeze	Both clauses are present simple; this describes an invariable result.	recognition conditional-zero general-truth core
Plants die if you do not water them.	Zero Conditional	zero	present simple, if + present simple	general rule	die if you do not water	Both clauses use present simple; the result always follows the condition.	recognition conditional-zero rule core
If it rains tomorrow, we will cancel the trip.	First Conditional	first	if + present simple, will + base verb	real future condition and likely result	If it rains; we will cancel	The condition is possible; the result is a likely future outcome.	recognition conditional-first real core
She will call you if she needs help.	First Conditional	first	will + base verb, if + present simple	real future condition	will call; if she needs	A genuine possible future situation with a predictable result.	recognition conditional-first possible core
If you leave now, you will catch the last train.	First Conditional	first	if + present simple, will + base verb	practical real condition and consequence	If you leave now; will catch	The first conditional expresses a real and actionable future possibility.	recognition conditional-first consequence core
Will you come if I invite you?	First Conditional	first	will + base verb, if + present simple	asking about a likely future condition	Will you come; if I invite	The question presents a real possible condition and asks about its likely result.	recognition conditional-first question core
If I had more time, I would learn Spanish.	Second Conditional	second	if + past simple, would + base verb	unreal or unlikely present/future condition	If I had more time; would learn	The past simple in the if-clause marks unreality; the result is hypothetical.	recognition conditional-second unreal core
She would travel more if she earned a higher salary.	Second Conditional	second	would + base verb, if + past simple	hypothetical present situation	would travel; if she earned	The condition is imaginary; both the condition and result are unreal.	recognition conditional-second hypothetical core
If he were taller, he could play professional basketball.	Second Conditional	second	if + past simple (were for all persons), could + base verb	impossible condition	If he were taller; could play	Were is used for all subjects in formal second conditional to mark unreality.	recognition conditional-second impossible core
What would you do if you lost your job?	Second Conditional	second	would + base verb, if + past simple	hypothetical question	What would you do; if you lost	The speaker imagines an unreal situation and asks about its hypothetical result.	recognition conditional-second question core
If she had studied harder, she would have passed the exam.	Third Conditional	third	if + past perfect, would have + past participle	unreal past condition and imagined past result	If she had studied; would have passed	Both the condition and result are in the past; neither actually happened.	recognition conditional-third unreal-past core
We would have caught the train if we had left earlier.	Third Conditional	third	would have + past participle, if + past perfect	imagined alternative past outcome	would have caught; if we had left	The third conditional imagines a different past result from a different past condition.	recognition conditional-third alternative core
If he had known the truth, he would not have lied.	Third Conditional	third	if + past perfect, would not have + past participle	negative unreal past result	If he had known; would not have lied	The negative result is imaginary; the actual situation was different.	recognition conditional-third negative core
Would you have accepted the offer if they had given you more time?	Third Conditional	third	would have + past participle, if + past perfect	hypothetical question about the past	Would you have accepted; if they had given	The question imagines an alternative past situation and its hypothetical result.	recognition conditional-third question core
If she had taken the job, she would be living in New York now.	Mixed Conditional	mixed	if + past perfect, would + be + verb-ing (present result)	unreal past condition with a present-time result	If she had taken; would be living now	The past perfect in the if-clause refers to the past; would + be + -ing shows a present imagined consequence.	recognition conditional-mixed past-to-present advanced
He would be healthier now if he had eaten better earlier in life.	Mixed Conditional	mixed	would + base verb (present result), if + past perfect	past condition leading to a present imagined state	would be healthier now; if he had eaten	The if-clause is past perfect; the main clause imagines a different present reality.	recognition conditional-mixed past-to-present advanced
Coffee is grown in Colombia.	Present Simple Passive	simple	am/is/are + past participle	general truth or fact, no agent needed	is grown	The passive focuses on the coffee, not the people who grow it.	recognition passive-present-simple fact core
The results are checked by the manager every day.	Present Simple Passive	simple	am/is/are + past participle (by + agent)	regular passive with named agent	are checked; by the manager every day	The by-phrase names the agent, but the focus is on the results being checked.	recognition passive-present-simple agent core
These cars are not manufactured in Europe.	Present Simple Passive	simple	am/is/are not + past participle	negative passive statement	are not manufactured	The negative passive shifts focus to the cars, not to who makes them.	recognition passive-present-simple negative core
How many emails are sent each day?	Present Simple Passive	simple	am/is/are + past participle	passive question about a general fact	are sent each day	The focus is on the emails being sent, not on who sends them.	recognition passive-present-simple question core
The window was broken last night.	Past Simple Passive	simple	was/were + past participle	completed past event, no agent named	was broken last night	The passive focuses on the window; the agent is unknown or irrelevant.	recognition passive-past-simple event core
The letter was signed by the director.	Past Simple Passive	simple	was/were + past participle + by + agent	completed past action with named agent	was signed; by the director	The by-phrase names the agent, but the subject (letter) receives the focus.	recognition passive-past-simple agent core
The emails were not delivered on time.	Past Simple Passive	simple	was/were not + past participle	negative past passive	were not delivered on time	The passive highlights the emails and what happened to them.	recognition passive-past-simple negative core
When was the Eiffel Tower built?	Past Simple Passive	simple	was/were + subject + past participle	question about a past passive event	was the Eiffel Tower built	The passive question focuses on the tower, not on the builders.	recognition passive-past-simple question core
The report has been submitted.	Present Perfect Passive	perfective	have/has been + past participle	recently completed action with present relevance, no agent	has been submitted	The passive perfect focuses on the current state of the report, not who submitted it.	recognition passive-present-perfect result core
Several new features have been added to the app.	Present Perfect Passive	perfective	have/has been + past participle	unspecified agent, result relevant now	have been added	The focus is on what has happened to the app, not who did it.	recognition passive-present-perfect change core
The package has not been delivered yet.	Present Perfect Passive	perfective	have/has not been + past participle	negative present perfect passive	has not been delivered yet	Yet links the non-delivery to the present; the passive keeps focus on the package.	recognition passive-present-perfect negative core
Has the contract been reviewed?	Present Perfect Passive	perfective	have/has + subject + been + past participle	question about a completed action with present relevance	Has the contract been reviewed	The passive perfect question focuses on the contract status, not on who reviewed it.	recognition passive-present-perfect question core
This issue must be resolved immediately.	Modal Passive	modal	modal + be + past participle	necessity expressed passively	must be resolved	The modal passive expresses obligation without naming who must act.	recognition passive-modal necessity core
The meeting can be postponed if needed.	Modal Passive	modal	modal + be + past participle	possibility expressed passively	can be postponed	The passive allows the modal to express possibility without specifying who acts.	recognition passive-modal possibility core
All documents should be backed up regularly.	Modal Passive	modal	modal + be + past participle	advice expressed passively	should be backed up	The passive keeps the focus on the documents rather than on who should do it.	recognition passive-modal advice core
I know the answer.	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	base verb / 3rd person singular -s	stative verb expressing a mental state	know; no -ing form	Know is a stative verb and is normally not used in the continuous.	recognition stative present-simple knowledge core
This soup tastes amazing.	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	base verb / 3rd person singular -s	stative verb of perception or quality	tastes	Taste used as a linking verb to describe quality is stative; no -ing.	recognition stative present-simple perception core
The package belongs to the marketing team.	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	base verb / 3rd person singular -s	stative verb of possession or relation	belongs	Belong expresses a state of ownership or membership and is not normally progressive.	recognition stative present-simple possession core
He is being very rude today.	Present Continuous (Dynamic Stative Shift)	progressive	am/is/are + verb-ing	temporary behaviour, not a permanent character trait	is being rude today	Be is usually stative, but is being + adjective describes deliberate temporary behaviour.	recognition dynamic-stative being-behaviour advanced
I am thinking about changing careers.	Present Continuous (Dynamic Stative Shift)	progressive	am/is/are + verb-ing	active mental process, not a fixed opinion	am thinking about	Think in the continuous means actively considering something, unlike I think you're right.	recognition dynamic-stative thinking advanced
We are having a great time.	Present Continuous (Dynamic Stative Shift)	progressive	am/is/are + verb-ing	experience happening now, dynamic use of have	are having a great time	Have in the continuous expresses an experience in progress, not possession.	recognition dynamic-stative having advanced
She is tasting the sauce to check if it needs more salt.	Present Continuous (Dynamic Stative Shift)	progressive	am/is/are + verb-ing	deliberate active action, not a passive perception	is tasting; to check	Taste in the continuous signals a deliberate action, not a passive sensory experience.	recognition dynamic-stative tasting advanced
She is going to need more time to finish this.	Be Going To	intentional	am/is/are going to + base verb	prediction based on current circumstances	is going to need; context makes the outcome clear	Be going to is natural when the current situation makes an outcome predictable.	recognition future-going-to evidence core
If I miss the bus, I take a taxi.	Zero Conditional	zero	if + present simple, present simple	habitual result	If I miss; I take	Both clauses use present simple; the result reliably follows the condition.	recognition conditional-zero habit core
If I had studied harder in school, I would be working as an engineer now.	Mixed Conditional	mixed	if + past perfect, would + base verb (present result)	unreal past condition with a present-time result	If I had studied; would be working now	Past perfect in the if-clause; would + base verb shows a different present reality.	recognition conditional-mixed past-to-present advanced
She loves hiking.	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	base verb / 3rd person singular -s	stative verb expressing emotion	loves	Love describes an ongoing emotional state and does not use the continuous form.	recognition stative present-simple emotion core
She appears confident in the meeting.	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	base verb / 3rd person singular -s	stative verb of appearance or state	appears confident	Appear as a linking verb is stative and does not normally take -ing.	recognition stative present-simple appearance core
This box contains fragile items.	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	base verb / 3rd person singular -s	stative verb of relation or content	contains	Contain is stative; it describes a state of inclusion, not an action.	recognition stative present-simple relation core
The course costs five hundred dollars.	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	base verb / 3rd person singular -s	stative verb of value or quantity	costs five hundred dollars	Cost is stative; it expresses a fixed property, not an action.	recognition stative present-simple quantity core
I want to finish this before the deadline.	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	base verb	stative verb of desire or will	want to finish	Want is stative and does not normally use the continuous form.	recognition stative present-simple desire core
She seems tired after the journey.	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	base verb / 3rd person singular -s	stative verb of appearance	seems tired	Seem is stative; it describes how something appears, not an ongoing action.	recognition stative present-simple seem core
The ceremony will be held in the main hall.	Modal Passive	modal	will + be + past participle	future passive with certainty	will be held	Will be + past participle is a common future passive form.	recognition passive-modal future core
The issue might be caused by a software bug.	Modal Passive	modal	might + be + past participle	passive expressing possibility	might be caused	Might be + past participle expresses a possible passive situation.	recognition passive-modal possibility core
The deadline would be extended if the team requested it.	Modal Passive	modal	would + be + past participle	conditional passive	would be extended	Would be + past participle is used for hypothetical or conditional passive situations.	recognition passive-modal conditional core
If I were better at planning, I would have finished the project on time.	Mixed Conditional	mixed	if + past simple (were), would have + past participle (past result)	unreal present condition with an imagined past result	If I were; would have finished	The present unreal state (poor planning) explains a past missed outcome.	recognition conditional-mixed present-to-past advanced
I see what you mean now.	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	base verb	stative verb expressing understanding or mental state	see; understanding, not physical vision in motion	See meaning understand is stative; the continuous form is not used here.	recognition stative present-simple perception core
The parcel could not be delivered because nobody was home.	Modal Passive	modal	modal + not + be + past participle	negative modal passive expressing impossibility	could not be delivered	The negative modal passive focuses on what happened to the parcel, not who tried to deliver it.	recognition passive-modal negative core
Unless you leave now, you will miss the last train.	First Conditional	first	unless + present simple, will + base verb	real condition expressed with unless (equivalent to if not)	Unless you leave; will miss	Unless means if not; the condition must be avoided to prevent the result.	recognition conditional-first unless core
She would call more often if she had better reception.	Conditional Simple	simple	would + base verb, if + past simple	hypothetical result of an unreal present condition	would call; if she had	Would + base verb expresses the hypothetical result; past simple marks the unreal condition.	recognition conditional-simple hypothetical core
Would you move abroad if you got the opportunity?	Conditional Simple	simple	would + subject + base verb, if + past simple	hypothetical question about an imagined situation	Would you move; if you got	The question imagines an unreal scenario and asks about the hypothetical result.	recognition conditional-simple question core
If I had a car, I would drive to work instead of taking the bus.	Conditional Simple	simple	if + past simple, would + base verb	unreal present condition and its hypothetical consequence	If I had a car; would drive	Past simple in the if-clause marks unreality; would + base verb gives the consequence.	recognition conditional-simple unreal core
If the weather were better, we would eat outside.	Conditional Simple	simple	if + past simple (were), would + base verb	impossible or unlikely present condition	If the weather were better; would eat outside	Were is used for all subjects in formal conditional to mark an unreal state.	recognition conditional-simple impossible core
He would not accept help even if you offered it.	Conditional Simple	simple	would not + base verb, even if + past simple	hypothetical negative result of an unreal condition	would not accept; even if you offered	Even if strengthens the hypothetical; would not marks the negative result.	recognition conditional-simple negative core
If it were not raining, we would be sitting outside.	Conditional Continuous	progressive	if + past simple (were), would + be + verb-ing	unreal present condition and its hypothetical ongoing result	If it were not raining; would be sitting	Would be + -ing shows an action that would be in progress if the condition were met.	recognition conditional-continuous unreal core
Would she be studying abroad if she had chosen a different university?	Conditional Continuous	progressive	would + subject + be + verb-ing, if + past perfect	hypothetical question about an imagined ongoing situation	Would she be studying; if she had chosen	Would be + -ing asks about a hypothetical ongoing activity.	recognition conditional-continuous question advanced
They would not be waiting here if someone had told them the truth.	Conditional Continuous	progressive	would not + be + verb-ing, if + past perfect	hypothetical negative ongoing situation based on an unreal past condition	would not be waiting; if someone had told	The negative continuous conditional imagines what would not be happening given a different past.	recognition conditional-continuous negative advanced
If she had arrived earlier, she would have caught the beginning of the film.	Conditional Perfect	perfective	if + past perfect, would have + past participle	unreal past condition and its imagined completed result	If she had arrived; would have caught	Both clauses are in the past; neither the condition nor the result actually happened.	recognition conditional-perfect unreal core
Would he have taken the job if they had offered him a higher salary?	Conditional Perfect	perfective	would + subject + have + past participle, if + past perfect	hypothetical question about an unreal past decision	Would he have taken; if they had offered	The question imagines a different past outcome based on a different past condition.	recognition conditional-perfect question core
She would not have resigned if the manager had treated her fairly.	Conditional Perfect	perfective	would not have + past participle, if + past perfect	negative unreal past result based on an unreal past condition	would not have resigned; if the manager had treated	The negative perfect conditional imagines a different past outcome.	recognition conditional-perfect negative core
If the project had started on time, we would have been working on it for a month by now.	Conditional Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	if + past perfect, would have been + verb-ing	unreal past condition with an imagined ongoing result up to a present point	If the project had started; would have been working by now	Would have been + -ing imagines the ongoing duration of an unreal activity up to now.	recognition conditional-perfect-continuous hypothetical advanced
Would you have been waiting this long if you had known the meeting was delayed?	Conditional Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	would + subject + have been + verb-ing, if + past perfect	hypothetical question about an imagined ongoing past action	Would you have been waiting; if you had known	The question imagines whether an ongoing past action would have occurred given different knowledge.	recognition conditional-perfect-continuous question advanced
She would not have been studying all night if she had managed her time better.	Conditional Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	would not have been + verb-ing, if + past perfect	negative hypothetical ongoing past action based on a different past condition	would not have been studying; if she had managed	The negative form imagines the ongoing activity that would have been avoided.	recognition conditional-perfect-continuous negative advanced
She said she was tired.	Reported Speech (Backshift)	backshift	said + past simple (backshift from present simple)	reporting a present simple statement in the past	"said she was; direct: ""I am tired"""	The present simple 'am' shifts to past simple 'was' in reported speech.	recognition reported-speech backshift present-to-past core
He told me he had already eaten.	Reported Speech (Backshift)	backshift	told + past perfect (backshift from present perfect)	reporting a present perfect statement in the past	"told me he had already eaten; direct: ""I have already eaten"""	The present perfect 'has eaten' shifts to past perfect 'had eaten' in reported speech.	recognition reported-speech backshift present-perfect core
She said she was working late that night.	Reported Speech (Backshift)	backshift	said + past continuous (backshift from present continuous)	reporting an ongoing action statement in the past	"said she was working; direct: ""I'm working late"""	The present continuous 'is working' shifts to past continuous 'was working'.	recognition reported-speech backshift present-continuous core
He mentioned that he would call back later.	Reported Speech (Backshift)	backshift	mentioned + would + base verb (backshift from will)	reporting a future intention in the past	"mentioned he would call; direct: ""I'll call back"""	Will shifts to would in reported speech.	recognition reported-speech backshift future core
She explained that she had been waiting for over an hour.	Reported Speech (Backshift)	backshift	explained + past perfect continuous (backshift from present perfect continuous)	reporting a duration statement in the past	"had been waiting; direct: ""I've been waiting"""	Present perfect continuous shifts to past perfect continuous in reported speech.	recognition reported-speech backshift perfect-continuous core
He said the meeting started at nine.	Reported Speech (No Backshift)	backshift	said + present simple (no shift — general or permanent fact)	reporting a fact that is still true — no tense shift needed	said the meeting starts; general schedule fact	General truths and schedules often do not require backshift.	recognition reported-speech no-backshift fact core
She told him she would be in the office the next day.	Reported Speech (Backshift)	backshift	told + would + be + verb-ing (backshift from future continuous)	reporting a future arrangement in the past	"would be in the office; direct: ""I'll be in the office"""	Future continuous shifts to conditional continuous in reported speech.	recognition reported-speech backshift future-continuous advanced
They announced that the event had been cancelled.	Reported Speech (Backshift)	backshift	announced + past perfect passive (backshift from present perfect passive)	reporting a passive event statement in the past	"had been cancelled; direct: ""has been cancelled"""	Present perfect passive shifts to past perfect passive in reported speech.	recognition reported-speech backshift passive advanced
I'll call you when I arrive.	Time Clause (Future)	simple	will + base verb, when + present simple	future main clause with present simple in the time clause	when I arrive (not will arrive); I'll call	After time conjunctions like when, before, after, until, the present simple is used for future meaning.	recognition time-clause future-present core
She had already left by the time I got there.	Time Clause (Past Perfect)	perfective	past perfect, by the time + past simple	earlier action completed before a past reference point	had already left; by the time I got	By the time + past simple shows the reference point; past perfect marks the earlier action.	recognition time-clause past-perfect sequence core
As soon as the meeting ends, I'll send you the notes.	Time Clause (Future)	simple	will + base verb, as soon as + present simple	immediate future action after a future trigger	as soon as the meeting ends (not will end)	As soon as introduces a future time clause; present simple is used despite future meaning.	recognition time-clause as-soon-as core
While she was presenting, the projector stopped working.	Time Clause (Past Continuous)	progressive	past continuous + while, past simple (interruption)	background ongoing action interrupted by a shorter event	while she was presenting; stopped (interruption)	While + past continuous sets the background; past simple marks the interruption.	recognition time-clause while-past-continuous core
I'll stay until she gets back.	Time Clause (Future)	simple	will + base verb, until + present simple	future action continuing up to a future point	I'll stay until she gets (not will get)	Until introduces a future endpoint; present simple is used in the clause despite future meaning.	recognition time-clause until core
Before you submit the form, make sure everything is correct.	Time Clause (Imperative + Before)	simple	imperative, before + present simple	instruction with a future time reference	before you submit (present simple for future)	Before + present simple gives a future reference point; imperative or present simple in main clause.	recognition time-clause before-imperative core
After she had reviewed the draft, she sent it to the client.	Time Clause (Past Perfect)	perfective	after + past perfect, past simple	completed action before another past action	after she had reviewed; then sent	After + past perfect makes the sequence of past actions explicit.	recognition time-clause after-past-perfect core
By the time you read this, I'll have landed.	Time Clause (Future Perfect)	perfective	by the time + present simple, will have + past participle	action completed before a future reference point	by the time you read; I'll have landed	By the time + present simple with future perfect in the main clause.	recognition time-clause future-perfect core
I wish I had more time.	Wish (Present Unreal)	second	wish + past simple	expressing desire for an unreal or impossible present situation	wish I had; present unreal desire	Wish + past simple is parallel to the second conditional — both describe unreal present situations.	recognition wish present-unreal core
She wishes she lived closer to work.	Wish (Present Unreal)	second	wish + past simple	expressing desire for a different present reality	wishes she lived; unreal present desire	Wish + past simple expresses a desire for a different present situation.	recognition wish present-unreal core
I wish I hadn't said that.	Wish (Past Regret)	third	wish + past perfect	expressing regret about a past action or situation	wish I hadn't said; past regret	Wish + past perfect is parallel to the third conditional — both refer to unreal past situations.	recognition wish past-regret core
He wishes he had applied for that job.	Wish (Past Regret)	third	wish + past perfect	expressing regret about a missed opportunity in the past	wishes he had applied; missed opportunity	Wish + past perfect expresses regret that something did not happen in the past.	recognition wish past-regret core
If only I could speak Spanish fluently!	If Only (Present Unreal)	second	if only + past simple / could	expressing a strong desire for an unreal present situation	if only I could; stronger emotion than wish	If only is like wish but expresses stronger emotion; same grammatical structure.	recognition if-only present-unreal core
If only she had told me earlier!	If Only (Past Regret)	third	if only + past perfect	expressing strong regret about a past situation	if only she had told; strong past regret	If only + past perfect expresses strong regret, parallel to wish + past perfect.	recognition if-only past-regret core
Had I known the truth, I would have acted differently.	Inverted Conditional (Third)	third	had + subject + past participle (inversion of if + past perfect)	formal third conditional without if — using inversion	Had I known; formal inversion of if I had known	Inverted conditionals omit 'if' and move had/were/should to the start — formal register.	recognition inverted-conditional third advanced
Were she to apply, she would easily get the role.	Inverted Conditional (Second)	second	were + subject + to + base verb (inversion of if + past simple)	formal second conditional without if — using inversion	Were she to apply; formal inversion of if she applied	Were to + base verb is a formal alternative to if + past simple.	recognition inverted-conditional second advanced
You can borrow the car, as long as you fill it up afterwards.	As Long As (Conditional)	first	as long as + present simple, will / imperative	real condition with a requirement — similar to first conditional	as long as you fill it up; conditional requirement	As long as means 'on the condition that' and follows the same tense rules as if in first conditionals.	recognition as-long-as conditional core
Provided that you meet the deadline, we'll proceed with the plan.	Provided That (Conditional)	first	provided that + present simple, will + base verb	formal conditional expressing a requirement	provided that you meet; formal equivalent of if	Provided that is a formal alternative to if, used in professional or official contexts.	recognition provided-that conditional advanced
I wish I were taller.	Wish (Present Unreal)	second	wish + were (subjunctive for all persons)	expressing desire for an impossible present reality	wish I were; were is used for all persons in formal/careful usage	In formal English, were is used for all persons after wish — not was.	recognition wish subjunctive core
I was going to call you, but I forgot.	Was/Were Going To	intentional	was/were going to + base verb	unfulfilled past intention — something planned but not done	was going to call; but I forgot (not done)	Was going to shows a past plan that did not happen — different from be going to for future.	recognition future-was-going-to unfulfilled core
She was going to take the earlier train, but it was cancelled.	Was/Were Going To	intentional	was/were going to + base verb	unfulfilled past plan due to a change in circumstances	was going to take; but it was cancelled	Was going to + but shows something prevented the original plan.	recognition future-was-going-to cancelled-plan core
She's about to leave — you just caught her in time.	Be About To	simple	am/is/are + about to + base verb	immediate future — something is going to happen very soon	about to leave; just in time	About to expresses immediacy — the action is on the verge of happening.	recognition future-about-to immediate core
The film is about to start — everyone take your seats.	Be About To	simple	am/is/are + about to + base verb	action imminent in the immediate future	is about to start; take your seats	About to is used when an action is imminent, often to warn or inform.	recognition future-about-to imminent core
I'll carry that for you.	Future Simple (will — offer)	simple	I'll + base verb	spontaneous offer to help	I'll carry; offering help without being asked	I'll is very natural for spontaneous offers; going to is not used for offers.	recognition future-will-offer core
I'll always love you.	Future Simple (will — promise)	simple	will + base verb	sincere promise about the future	I'll always love; emotional promise	Will expresses a sincere promise — a commitment about the future.	recognition future-will-promise core
The package is due to arrive tomorrow.	Due To (Formal Future)	simple	am/is/are due to + base verb	expected or scheduled event — formal/official register	is due to arrive; official expectation	Due to is used in formal or official contexts to describe scheduled or expected events.	recognition future-due-to formal advanced
Prices are rising every month.	Present Continuous (Trend)	progressive	am/is/are + verb-ing	describing an ongoing trend or gradual change	are rising every month; trend over time	Present continuous can describe trends or changes in progress, not just actions happening right now.	recognition present-continuous trend core
She's always leaving her coffee cup on the desk.	Present Continuous (Complaint)	progressive	am/is/are + always + verb-ing	expressing irritation about a repeated habit	she's always leaving; always signals annoyance	Always + present continuous expresses irritation about a repeated pattern.	recognition present-continuous complaint core
He's constantly interrupting people in meetings.	Present Continuous (Complaint)	progressive	am/is/are + constantly/always + verb-ing	expressing irritation about a recurring behaviour	constantly interrupting; adverb signals annoyance	Constantly/always + present continuous expresses irritation, not frequency as a fact.	recognition present-continuous complaint core
The road was being repaired when the accident happened.	Past Continuous Passive	progressive	was/were being + past participle	ongoing passive action at a past moment	was being repaired; when the accident happened (interruption)	Past continuous passive describes a passive action in progress at a past time.	recognition passive-past-continuous core
The suspect was being questioned by detectives all night.	Past Continuous Passive	progressive	was/were being + past participle	extended ongoing passive action in the past	was being questioned; all night	Was being + past participle describes an extended passive process in the past.	recognition passive-past-continuous extended core
The report had been reviewed before it was sent out.	Past Perfect Passive	perfective	had been + past participle	passive action completed before another past event	had been reviewed; before it was sent	Past perfect passive marks a passive action completed before another past reference point.	recognition passive-past-perfect sequence core
By the time the team arrived, the venue had already been set up.	Past Perfect Passive	perfective	had been + past participle	passive action completed before a past reference point	had already been set up; by the time	Had been + past participle shows a passive action completed before another past moment.	recognition passive-past-perfect timeline core
She got promoted last month.	Get-Passive	simple	got + past participle	informal passive — often implies suddenness or personal involvement	got promoted; informal, personal impact	Get-passive is common in informal speech; it often implies the subject is personally affected.	recognition passive-get informal core
My bike got stolen outside the station.	Get-Passive	simple	got + past participle	informal passive emphasising a negative personal impact	got stolen; negative unexpected event	Get + past participle is common in informal speech for unexpected or negative events.	recognition passive-get negative core
She hates being interrupted during presentations.	Gerund Passive	simple	being + past participle (gerund passive)	passive gerund as the object of a verb or preposition	hates being interrupted; gerund after hate	Being + past participle functions as a gerund and can follow verbs like hate, avoid, enjoy.	recognition passive-gerund core
Nobody likes being kept waiting.	Gerund Passive	simple	being + past participle (gerund passive)	passive gerund expressing a universally disliked experience	being kept waiting; after likes	Being kept waiting is a passive gerund — a very common fixed expression.	recognition passive-gerund common core
He wants to be promoted before the end of the year.	Infinitive Passive	simple	to be + past participle (infinitive passive)	passive infinitive expressing a desire or expectation	wants to be promoted; after wants	To be + past participle is a passive infinitive; very common after want, expect, hope, need.	recognition passive-infinitive core
The issue needs to be addressed urgently.	Infinitive Passive	simple	needs to be + past participle (infinitive passive)	passive infinitive expressing necessity	needs to be addressed; after needs	Needs to be + past participle is a very common passive infinitive pattern in professional English.	recognition passive-infinitive necessity core
She was given a standing ovation.	Dative Passive	simple	was/were given/told/shown + object (dative passive)	passive with a verb that takes two objects — indirect object becomes subject	was given; subject receives indirect object	Dative passive promotes the indirect object to subject position. Common with give, tell, show, send.	recognition passive-dative core
They were told the meeting had been postponed.	Dative Passive	simple	was/were told + clause (dative passive)	passive with told — the indirect object becomes subject	were told the meeting; told with a that-clause	Were told is a dative passive — very common in formal communication and reporting.	recognition passive-dative told advanced
She feels nervous about the interview.	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	base verb / 3rd person singular -s	stative verb expressing an emotional or physical state	feels nervous; emotional state	Feel describing a state uses the simple form; feel as an action (touching) can use the continuous.	recognition stative feel-state core
He's feeling his way along the wall in the dark.	Present Continuous (Dynamic Stative Shift)	progressive	am/is/are + verb-ing	feel used as a deliberate physical action	he's feeling his way; deliberate tactile action	Feel as a deliberate action uses the continuous; feel as a state uses the simple.	recognition dynamic-stative feel-action core
You look exhausted — you should rest.	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	base verb / 3rd person singular -s	stative verb of appearance or perceived state	look exhausted; appearance/state	Look meaning appear is stative; look meaning direct gaze is dynamic and can be continuous.	recognition stative look-appearance core
She's looking at the map to find the route.	Present Continuous (Dynamic Stative Shift)	progressive	am/is/are + verb-ing	look used as a deliberate directed action	she's looking at the map; directed gaze	Look at (direct gaze) is dynamic and can use the continuous; look (appear) is stative.	recognition dynamic-stative look-action core
This bag weighs over ten kilograms.	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	base verb / 3rd person singular -s	stative verb expressing a fixed measurable property	weighs ten kilograms; fixed measurement	Weigh in the sense of having a weight is stative; weigh as an action (measuring) is dynamic.	recognition stative weigh core
The chef is weighing the ingredients carefully.	Present Continuous (Dynamic Stative Shift)	progressive	am/is/are + verb-ing	weigh used as a deliberate measuring action	is weighing the ingredients; deliberate measurement	Weigh as a deliberate action (measuring) is dynamic and can use the continuous.	recognition dynamic-stative weigh-action core
I prefer working from home when I can.	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	base verb	stative verb expressing preference	prefer working; preference state	Prefer is stative and does not normally use the continuous form.	recognition stative prefer core
It doesn't matter what they think.	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	do/does not + base verb	stative verb expressing significance or relevance	doesn't matter; fixed state of relevance	Matter is stative; it describes a state of importance, not an action.	recognition stative matter core
Do you mind if I open the window?	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	do + subject + mind + if	stative verb used in a polite request formula	Do you mind if; fixed request pattern	Mind in this pattern is stative — it describes a state of objection or preference.	recognition stative mind core
I suppose you're right.	Present Simple (Stative)	stative	base verb	stative verb expressing a tentative belief or assumption	I suppose; hedging or tentative opinion	Suppose is stative; it expresses a mental state of tentative belief.	recognition stative suppose core
She's just finished the report.	Present Perfect (Just)	perfective	have/has + just + past participle	very recently completed action with present relevance	she's just finished; very recent completion	Just signals that the action was completed moments ago — present perfect with strong recency.	recognition present-perfect just core
Have you eaten already? We haven't even started cooking!	Present Perfect (Already)	perfective	have/has + already + past participle	action completed sooner than expected	eaten already; sooner than expected	Already in questions expresses surprise that something has happened earlier than expected.	recognition present-perfect already core
I still haven't heard back from them.	Present Perfect (Still)	perfective	still + have/has not + past participle	expected action that has not happened yet	still haven't heard; continuing non-occurrence	Still + present perfect negative expresses continuing absence of an expected action.	recognition present-perfect still core
She left, locked the door, and walked to the station.	Past Simple (Narrative Sequence)	simple	past simple + past simple + past simple	sequence of completed past actions told in order	left, locked, walked; sequential chain	Past simple chains describe narrative sequences — each action follows the previous one.	recognition past-simple narrative-sequence core
She'd been travelling all night and was exhausted when she finally arrived.	Past Perfect Continuous (Narrative)	perfect-progressive	had been + verb-ing, past simple	emphasising duration of an activity before a past point in a narrative	she'd been travelling all night; exhausted when she arrived	Past perfect continuous in narrative emphasises how long something had been happening before the main past event.	recognition past-perfect-continuous narrative advanced
I must finish this report by Friday.	Modal (Must — Obligation)	modal	must + base verb	strong obligation, no choice	Duty, no escape	Not deduction; this expresses a strong obligation imposed by the speaker, not a confident inference.	modal recognition
You must be joking about that price.	Modal (Must — Deduction)	modal	must + base verb	logical deduction, certainty	99% sure about it	Not obligation; this is a confident logical inference based on evidence, not a rule the subject must follow.	modal recognition
He has to take the medication every day.	Modal (Have To — External Obligation)	modal	have to + base verb	external obligation, rules	Rules from outside	Not 'must'; 'have to' marks an external obligation (rules, others), whereas 'must' marks the speaker's own conviction.	modal recognition
Students should respect their teachers.	Modal (Should — Advice)	modal	should + base verb	advice, recommendation	Gentle suggestion	Not 'must'; 'should' is advisory and softer, while 'must' would imply a stronger obligation or necessity.	modal recognition
You ought to call your mother soon.	Modal (Ought To)	modal	ought to + base verb	moral obligation, advice	Formal advice	Not 'should'; 'ought to' is slightly more formal/moral, while 'should' is everyday neutral advice.	modal recognition
You'd better not arrive late.	Modal (Had Better)	modal	had better + base verb	strong advice, warning	Threat of consequence	Not 'should'; 'had better' carries an implicit warning of bad consequences, stronger than mere advice.	modal recognition
You may borrow my pen if you like.	Modal (May — Permission)	modal	may + base verb	formal permission	Asking politely	Not possibility; 'may' here grants or requests permission, not a guess about what could happen.	modal recognition
It may rain tomorrow.	Modal (May — Possibility)	modal	may + base verb	possibility, chance	Maybe it will	Not permission; 'may' here estimates likelihood, not asks/grants approval.	modal recognition
She might be at the library now.	Modal (Might — Possibility)	modal	might + base verb	possibility, less likely than may	Weaker chance	Not 'may'; 'might' suggests a slightly weaker or more tentative possibility.	modal recognition
Can you swim?	Modal (Can — Ability)	modal	can + base verb	ability, possibility	Can do it	Not permission; 'can' here means the subject has the skill or capacity to do something.	modal recognition
When I was young I could climb trees easily.	Modal (Could — Past Ability)	modal	could + base verb	past ability, general	Used to be able to	Not present; 'could' here refers to a general past ability or a remembered past skill.	modal recognition
I am able to solve this puzzle.	Modal (Be Able To)	modal	be able to + base verb	ability, more formal	Can do, formal style	Not 'can'; 'be able to' covers tenses and infinitives where 'can' has no form (will be able to, has been able to).	modal recognition
That can't be true based on the evidence.	Modal (Can't — Negative Deduction)	modal	can't + base verb	negative certainty, impossible	Definitely NOT	Not 'must not' (which means prohibition); 'can't' expresses the speaker's confident negative inference.	modal recognition
She should have told me earlier.	Modal Perfect (Should Have)	perfective	should + have + past participle	past regret, missed opportunity	Regret about past	Not present advice; 'should have done' expresses regret about a past action that was not taken.	modal modal-perfect recognition
They must have forgotten about the meeting.	Modal Perfect (Must Have)	perfective	must + have + past participle	past deduction, certainty	Definitely happened	Not present deduction; 'must have done' marks a confident inference about a past event based on evidence.	modal modal-perfect recognition
He can't have stolen the jewels.	Modal Perfect (Can't Have)	perfective	can't + have + past participle	past impossibility	Definitely didn't	Not 'mustn't have'; 'can't have' is the natural negative deduction about a past event.	modal modal-perfect recognition
She could have won the race if she trained.	Modal Perfect (Could Have)	perfective	could + have + past participle	past possibility, missed chance	Maybe could've	Not real past; 'could have done' marks an unrealised past possibility — it was possible, but didn't happen.	modal modal-perfect recognition
They might have left already.	Modal Perfect (Might Have)	perfective	might + have + past participle	past possibility	Maybe they left	Not 'must have'; 'might have' expresses tentative speculation about a past event with low confidence.	modal modal-perfect recognition
You needn't have bought so much food.	Modal Perfect (Needn't Have)	perfective	needn't + have + past participle	unnecessary past action	Wasted effort	Not 'didn't need to'; 'needn't have done' implies the action was done but turned out to be unnecessary (regret).	modal modal-perfect recognition
I used to live in Bangkok.	Modal (Used To)	simple	used to + base verb	repeated past habit, no longer true	Old routine, stopped	Not single past event; 'used to' marks a discontinued past state or repeated habit, no longer true now.	modal modal-past-habit recognition
He would call every evening after work.	Modal (Would — Past Habit)	simple	would + base verb	repeated past habit, nostalgic	Nostalgic routine	Not single past event; 'would' for past habits is used in narrative contexts, never for past states (use 'used to' for states).	modal modal-past-habit recognition
You are supposed to submit the form by Monday.	Modal (Be Supposed To)	simple	be supposed to + base verb	obligation, expectation	What's expected	Future requirement	modal recognition
She said that she was tired.	Reported Speech (Backshift)	backshift	said + that + past tense	reporting past statement, verb tense shifts back	Present becomes Past	vs related forms	reported-speech backshift-present-to-past recognition
He told me that he was writing a novel.	Reported Speech (Backshift)	backshift	told + object + that + past continuous	reporting past continuous, shifts to past	Tense moves back one step	vs related forms	reported-speech backshift-present-to-past recognition
They said they had already eaten breakfast.	Reported Speech (Backshift)	backshift	said + that + past perfect	reporting past perfect, already did before	No change needed; was already perfect	vs related forms	reported-speech backshift-perfect recognition
She said she would help us tomorrow.	Reported Speech (Backshift)	backshift	said + that + would + base verb	reporting will, shifts to would	Will becomes Would	vs related forms	reported-speech backshift-present-to-past recognition
He told me he could swim.	Reported Speech (Backshift)	backshift	told + object + that + could	reporting can, shifts to could	Can becomes Could	vs related forms	reported-speech backshift-present-to-past recognition
She said she might arrive late.	Reported Speech (Backshift)	backshift	said + that + might	reporting may, shifts to might	May becomes Might	vs related forms	reported-speech backshift-present-to-past recognition
He said he had to leave early.	Reported Speech (Backshift)	backshift	said + that + had to	reporting must, shifts to had to	Must becomes Had To	vs related forms	reported-speech backshift-present-to-past recognition
She asked if he was coming to the party.	Reported Speech (Question)	backshift	asked if/whether + subject + past verb	reported yes/no question, word order fixes	Inverts back to subject-verb	vs related forms	reported-speech reported-question recognition
He asked what time we were arriving.	Reported Speech (Wh-Question)	backshift	asked + wh-word + subject + past verb	reported wh-question, word order fixes	Wh-word at front, then normal order	vs related forms	reported-speech reported-question recognition
She told me to finish the homework.	Reported Speech (Command)	simple	told + object + to + base verb	reporting command with indirect object	Base verb after to	vs related forms	reported-speech reported-command recognition
He asked me to help him move.	Reported Speech (Request)	simple	asked + object + to + base verb	reporting request, polite command	Base verb after to	vs related forms	reported-speech reported-command recognition
The teacher said that water boils at 100 degrees.	Reported Speech (No Backshift)	simple	said + that + present tense	universal truth, no time shift needed	Truth is timeless	vs related forms	reported-speech reported-no-backshift recognition
She suggested that he study harder.	Reported Speech (Suggest/Recommend)	simple	suggested + that + bare subjunctive	reported suggestion with subjunctive mood	Bare form verb	vs related forms	reported-speech recognition
They reported that she had been working there for five years.	Reported Speech (Backshift)	backshift	reported + that + past perfect continuous	reporting extended past action	Perfect + continuous tense	vs related forms	reported-speech backshift-perfect recognition
It is crucial that she complete the project on time.	Mandative Subjunctive	simple	verb + that + base verb	formal requirement, necessity	No -s on third person	vs related forms	subjunctive recognition
I wish you were here with me right now.	Wish (Present Unreal)	simple	wish + past tense	present unfulfilled desire, unreal	If only it were true	vs related forms	subjunctive wish-present recognition
I wish I had studied harder for the exam.	Wish (Past Regret)	perfective	wish + past perfect	regret about the past, too late	If only I had done it	vs related forms	subjunctive wish-past recognition
If only it would stop raining tomorrow.	If Only (Future)	simple	if only + would + base verb	future irritation, annoyance	Stop this unwanted future	vs related forms	subjunctive if-only recognition
I would rather stay home tonight.	Would Rather (Same Subject)	simple	would rather + base verb	preference, same subject	I prefer to stay	vs related forms	subjunctive would-rather recognition
He would rather you didn't mention his past.	Would Rather (Different Subject)	simple	would rather + past tense	preference about another person	Past tense for different subject	vs related forms	subjunctive would-rather recognition
It's time we left this party.	It's Time (Past Subjunctive)	simple	it's time + subject + past verb	strong suggestion, should go now	Use past, not infinitive	vs related forms	subjunctive its-time recognition
She acted as if she were the boss.	As If / As Though (Unreal)	simple	as if + past tense	unreal or contrary to fact	Pretending, not real	vs related forms	subjunctive as-if recognition
The manager spoke as though he had experience.	As If / As Though (Real)	perfective	as if + past perfect	realistic past scenario	Actually might be true	vs related forms	subjunctive as-if recognition
I wish that people would listen more carefully.	Wish (Future Annoyance)	simple	wish + would + base verb	future wish for habitual change	Wish for future habit	vs related forms	subjunctive wish-would recognition
If only you had told me about this earlier.	If Only (Past Regret)	perfective	if only + past perfect	regret about the past	If only you had done it then	vs related forms	subjunctive if-only recognition
It's essential that he submit the paperwork by Friday.	Mandative Subjunctive	simple	essential + that + base verb	formal requirement, necessity	No agreement -s	vs related forms	subjunctive recognition
She has to put up with his constant complaining at work.	Phrasal Verb (put up with)	perfective	tolerate / endure (transitive insep.)	expressing tolerance	suffering in silence	tolerate vs accept	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
He looks after his elderly mother every afternoon.	Phrasal Verb (look after)	simple	care for / tend (transitive insep.)	parental/caretaking	devoted attention	look after vs look for	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-literal recognition
I'm looking forward to the conference next month.	Phrasal Verb (look forward to)	progressive	anticipate / expect (transitive insep.)	expressing anticipation	future hope	look forward to vs look back on	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
The water has run out of the tank completely.	Phrasal Verb (run out of)	perfective	become depleted (transitive insep.)	resource exhaustion	supply gone	run out of vs use up	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
They get along with their neighbors surprisingly well.	Phrasal Verb (get along with)	simple	have good relations (transitive insep.)	social harmony	friendly vibes	get along with vs get away from	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
We came up with an innovative solution yesterday.	Phrasal Verb (come up with)	perfective	invent / devise (transitive insep.)	creative process	inspiration struck	come up with vs catch up with	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
She finally got over her childhood trauma.	Phrasal Verb (get over)	perfective	recover from / overcome (transitive insep.)	emotional recovery	moving on	get over vs get at	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
He gets up at six o'clock every morning.	Phrasal Verb (get up)	simple	wake and rise (intransitive)	daily routine	early bird	get up vs get on	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-literal recognition
They found out about the merger from the news.	Phrasal Verb (find out)	perfective	discover / learn (transitive insep.)	acquiring information	aha moment	find out vs figure out	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
Can you look for my keys in the living room?	Phrasal Verb (look for)	simple	search for (transitive insep.)	seeking objects	hunt mode	look for vs look after	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-literal recognition
The rocket will take off at dawn tomorrow.	Phrasal Verb (take off)	simple	depart / launch (intransitive)	aviation/departure	blast off	take off vs take on	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-literal recognition
She picked up her daughter from school today.	Phrasal Verb (pick up)	perfective	collect / retrieve (transitive sep.)	gathering	grab and go	pick up vs put down	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-literal recognition
He gave up smoking last year completely.	Phrasal Verb (give up)	perfective	abandon / quit (transitive sep.)	cessation	stop trying	give up vs put up with	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
Turn on the lights when you enter the room.	Phrasal Verb (turn on)	simple	activate / switch (transitive sep.)	mechanical action	power up	turn on vs turn off	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-literal recognition
They turned off the engine before leaving.	Phrasal Verb (turn off)	perfective	deactivate / switch (transitive sep.)	mechanical action	power down	turn off vs turn on	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-literal recognition
Can you turn up the volume a bit higher?	Phrasal Verb (turn up)	simple	increase / amplify (transitive sep.)	adjustment	louder please	turn up vs turn down	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-literal recognition
Turn down the heat before it boils over.	Phrasal Verb (turn down)	simple	decrease / reduce (transitive sep.)	adjustment	dial back	turn down vs turn up	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-literal recognition
The situation turned around completely within weeks.	Phrasal Verb (turn around)	perfective	reverse / improve (intransitive)	change direction	flip the script	turn around vs turn over	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-figurative recognition
She took on a new role in the company.	Phrasal Verb (take on)	perfective	accept / undertake (transitive sep.)	responsibility	new challenge	take on vs take off	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
The new CEO takes over on Monday morning.	Phrasal Verb (take over)	simple	assume control (transitive insep.)	authority shift	command change	take over vs take on	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
He took out a substantial loan from the bank.	Phrasal Verb (take out)	perfective	extract / obtain (transitive sep.)	procurement	get from source	take out vs take off	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
She brought up three children while working full-time.	Phrasal Verb (bring up)	perfective	raise / educate (transitive sep.)	parenting	child rearing	bring up vs bring in	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
He brought back gifts for everyone from Paris.	Phrasal Verb (bring back)	perfective	retrieve / return with (transitive sep.)	retrieval	souvenir haul	bring back vs bring in	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-literal recognition
The policy brought about major social changes.	Phrasal Verb (bring about)	perfective	cause / produce (transitive insep.)	causation	make it happen	bring about vs bring in	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
We should bring in a consultant to advise us.	Phrasal Verb (bring in)	simple	involve / introduce (transitive sep.)	inclusion	expert call	bring in vs bring up	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
They set up a new company last spring.	Phrasal Verb (set up)	perfective	establish / arrange (transitive sep.)	foundation	launch mode	set up vs set off	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
The alarm set off at three in the morning.	Phrasal Verb (set off)	perfective	trigger / activate (intransitive)	alarm/departure	bells ringing	set off vs set up	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-literal recognition
They set out to climb the mountain at dawn.	Phrasal Verb (set out)	perfective	begin journey / attempt (intransitive)	beginning	adventure starts	set out vs set up	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-figurative recognition
He set aside some money for emergencies monthly.	Phrasal Verb (set aside)	simple	reserve / allocate (transitive sep.)	resource management	save for later	set aside vs set off	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
This situation has been going on for months.	Phrasal Verb (go on)	perfective	continue / happen (intransitive)	duration	ongoing action	go on vs go off	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-figurative recognition
The light went off unexpectedly during the storm.	Phrasal Verb (go off)	perfective	activate / depart (intransitive)	sudden action	blast away	go off vs go on	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-literal recognition
He went through the document very carefully.	Phrasal Verb (go through)	perfective	examine / endure (transitive insep.)	examination	thorough review	go through vs go over	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
Let me go over the main points again.	Phrasal Verb (go over)	simple	review / examine (transitive insep.)	review	recap time	go over vs go through	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
Please go ahead and start without me.	Phrasal Verb (go ahead)	simple	proceed / continue (intransitive)	permission	green light	go ahead vs go back	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-figurative recognition
The meeting carried on until late evening.	Phrasal Verb (carry on)	perfective	continue / persevere (intransitive)	persistence	keep going	carry on vs carry out	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-figurative recognition
She carried out her duties with great dedication.	Phrasal Verb (carry out)	perfective	execute / perform (transitive insep.)	task completion	mission done	carry out vs carry on	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
Please carry over the balance to next month.	Phrasal Verb (carry over)	simple	transfer / continue (transitive sep.)	continuation	shift forward	carry over vs carry out	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
He handed in his resignation last Friday.	Phrasal Verb (hand in)	perfective	submit / deliver (transitive sep.)	submission	file it	hand in vs hand out	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-literal recognition
The teacher handed out the exams this morning.	Phrasal Verb (hand out)	perfective	distribute / give (transitive sep.)	distribution	pass it on	hand out vs hand in	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-literal recognition
She handed over control of the project yesterday.	Phrasal Verb (hand over)	perfective	transfer / give (transitive sep.)	transfer	pass the baton	hand over vs hand in	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
Hold on just a moment while I think.	Phrasal Verb (hold on)	simple	wait / persist (intransitive)	patience	just a sec	hold on vs hold up	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-figurative recognition
The structure was held up by steel beams.	Phrasal Verb (hold up)	perfective	support / delay (transitive sep.)	support/obstruction	prop it up	hold up vs hold on	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-literal recognition
She held back her tears throughout the ceremony.	Phrasal Verb (hold back)	perfective	restrain / suppress (transitive sep.)	control	keep it in	hold back vs hold on	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
The car broke down on the highway yesterday.	Phrasal Verb (break down)	perfective	malfunction / collapse (intransitive)	mechanical failure	kaput	break down vs break up	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-literal recognition
They broke up after dating for two years.	Phrasal Verb (break up)	perfective	end relationship / disperse (intransitive)	relationship	splitsville	break up vs break down	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-figurative recognition
Fighting broke out between the two groups.	Phrasal Verb (break out)	perfective	erupt / escape (intransitive)	eruption	all hell breaks loose	break out vs break in	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-figurative recognition
We need to break in the new employee carefully.	Phrasal Verb (break in)	simple	train / condition (transitive sep.)	training	getting started	break in vs break into	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
Thieves broke into the warehouse last night.	Phrasal Verb (break into)	perfective	enter forcibly (transitive insep.)	intrusion	smash and grab	break into vs break in	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-literal recognition
The relationship fell apart after the betrayal.	Phrasal Verb (fall apart)	perfective	collapse / disintegrate (intransitive)	dissolution	crumble	fall apart vs fall behind	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-figurative recognition
She fell behind in her studies this semester.	Phrasal Verb (fall behind)	perfective	lag / drop back (intransitive)	lag	catching up needed	fall behind vs fall apart	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-figurative recognition
The deal fell through at the last moment.	Phrasal Verb (fall through)	perfective	fail / collapse (intransitive)	failure	no dice	fall through vs fall behind	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-figurative recognition
I looked up the word in the dictionary.	Phrasal Verb (look up)	perfective	search for / consult (transitive insep.)	consultation	reference check	look up vs look into	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-literal recognition
She looked into the suspicious circumstances carefully.	Phrasal Verb (look into)	perfective	investigate / examine (transitive insep.)	investigation	detective work	look into vs look up	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
He always looks down on people from poor backgrounds.	Phrasal Verb (look down on)	simple	despise / regard poorly (transitive insep.)	contempt	snobby attitude	look down on vs look up to	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
I look up to my older sister very much.	Phrasal Verb (look up to)	simple	admire / respect (transitive insep.)	admiration	role model	look up to vs look down on	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
She made up a story to entertain the children.	Phrasal Verb (make up)	perfective	invent / create (transitive sep.)	creation	fiction	make up (invent) vs make up (reconcile)	phrasal-verb pv-separable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
They made up after their terrible argument.	Phrasal Verb (make up)	perfective	reconcile / resolve (intransitive)	reconciliation	peace treaty	make up (reconcile) vs make up (invent)	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-figurative recognition
Can you make out what the sign says?	Phrasal Verb (make out)	simple	perceive / decipher (transitive insep.)	perception	squint and read	make out vs make up	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
He should make up for his past mistakes.	Phrasal Verb (make up for)	simple	compensate / atone (transitive insep.)	restitution	paying dues	make up for vs make up	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
Did the math work out correctly this time?	Phrasal Verb (work out)	simple	calculate / succeed (intransitive)	mathematical/success	numbers add up	work out (calculate) vs work out (exercise)	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-figurative recognition
She works out at the gym three times weekly.	Phrasal Verb (work out)	simple	exercise / train (intransitive)	physical exercise	sweat session	work out (exercise) vs work out (calculate)	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-literal recognition
He finally calmed down after the stressful meeting.	Phrasal Verb (calm down)	perfective	become peaceful / relax (intransitive)	relaxation	chill out	calm down vs settle down	phrasal-verb pv-intransitive pv-figurative recognition
She managed to get away with cheating.	Phrasal Verb (get away with)	perfective	escape consequences (transitive insep.)	evasion	dodge the bullet	get away with vs get up to	phrasal-verb pv-inseparable pv-transitive pv-figurative recognition
So I'm walking down the street, and this guy comes up to me and asks for directions.	Historical Present (Narrative)	simple	V₀ + coord	Vivid storytelling	Shifts to present for immediacy	Plain past creates distance	discourse historical-present narrative-shift register-informal
Messi dribbles past three defenders, passes to Suarez, who shoots and SCORES!	Historical Present (Sports Commentary)	simple	V₀ + coord	Live-action commentary	Creates immediacy for audience	Past tense lacks energy	discourse historical-present register-formal
Prime minister resigns amid scandal. Opposition demands inquiry.	Headline Present	simple	V₀	News convention	Compressed, urgent register	Past simple seems distant	discourse headline register-formal
Add two eggs. Beat well. Pour into pan. Bake at 350 degrees.	Recipe Imperative	simple	Imp₀	Instruction register	Timeless, procedural	Would be awkward with past	discourse recipe register-informal
I was wondering if you could help me with this problem.	Hypothetical Past (Politeness)	progressive	WAS V-ing (polite modal frame)	Indirect request	Softer than "Can you help?"	Direct present seems abrupt	discourse politeness register-formal
I was wondering if you could have helped me yesterday.	Hypothetical Past Continuous (Politeness)	progressive	WAS V-ing (past modal frame)	Softened retrospective request	Hypothetical courtesy	Direct past seems accusatory	discourse politeness register-formal
Would you mind if I asked a quick question?	Past Continuous (Tentative Request)	progressive	WOULD (conditional modal)	Tentative, non-committal	Invites acceptance gracefully	Present is too presumptuous	discourse politeness register-formal
Could you possibly send that email by Friday?	Conditional (Polite Request)	modal	COULD (modal frame)	Softened command	Acknowledges recipient's agency	Imperative seems rude	discourse politeness register-formal
Did you want to leave early today?	Past Simple (Polite Distancing)	simple	V-ed (past frame for politeness)	Tentative offer, distanced	More considerate than direct	Present sounds presumptuous	discourse politeness register-formal
These results may suggest a correlation, though further study is needed.	Academic Hedging Modal (May)	modal	MAY V₀	Cautious academic claim	Signals tentative interpretation	Direct "shows" overstates	discourse hedging register-formal
The data might indicate a trend in user behavior.	Academic Hedging Modal (Might)	modal	MIGHT V₀	Weak possibility in analysis	Acknowledges uncertainty	"Does show" is too assertive	discourse hedging register-formal
This approach could offer several advantages for implementation.	Academic Hedging Modal (Could)	modal	COULD V₀	Speculative possibility	Hedges against overstatement	"Offers" commits too much	discourse hedging register-formal
It could be argued that the premise itself is flawed.	Academic Hedging (It Could Be Argued)	modal	IT COULD BE V-ed	Indirect attribution of doubt	Removes direct responsibility	"We argue against it" is direct	discourse hedging register-formal
I promise I will be there on time.	Performative Present	simple	V₀ + coord	Speech act creates obligation	"Promise" performatively binds speaker	"Promised" describes past	discourse performative register-formal
She enters, sees the body, screams. Curtain falls.	Stage Directions (Present)	simple	V₀ + coord	Immediate action cue	Convention in scripts	Past is uncommon in drama	discourse performative register-formal
A lone figure walks across the empty plaza toward the camera.	Caption Present	simple	V₀	Visual description narration	Describes what viewer sees	Past tense feels dated	discourse headline register-formal
The Prime Minister will announce the new policy tomorrow at noon.	Future Simple (Formal Announcement)	simple	WILL V₀	Official declaration	Formal, institutional register	Be going to is too casual	discourse register-formal
The bus is about to leave—we need to hurry!	Going-To (Imminent)	progressive	BE GOING TO V₀	Visible future moment	Audience can see it coming	Will seems less urgent	discourse register-informal
I'll help you move this weekend. Actually, I'll do it Saturday.	Will (Spontaneous Decision)	simple	WILL V₀	Sudden choice in moment	Speaker decides now	Going to implies pre-planning	discourse register-informal
It was John who broke the window, not his brother.	Cleft Sentence (It-Cleft)	simple	IT-CLEFT	Emphatic focus on actor	Highlights one element	Plain sentence distributes focus	discourse cleft emphatic register-formal
What she really needs is a proper apology.	Pseudo-Cleft (What-Cleft)	simple	WHAT-CLEFT	Fronts the focus element	Builds anticipation	Plain order loses emphasis	discourse cleft emphatic register-formal
I do like your proposal, and I'll vote for it.	Emphatic Do	simple	DO V₀	Emphatic affirmation	Contradicts implied doubt	Plain "like" can seem weak	discourse emphatic register-informal
I have been living in Madrid since 2010.	Present Perfect Continuous	perfective	HAVE BEEN V-ing	Duration from past to now	L1 trap: Spanish "Estoy viviendo" (present continuous) misses the duration-from-past meaning	Spanish aspect system is simpler; present continuous + duration = often calques wrong	l1-interference l1-spanish
She has worked at this company for five years.	Present Perfect	perfective	HAVE V-ed	Completed relevance to now	L1 trap: Spanish "Trabajó" (preterite) implies complete separation from present	Spanish preterite excludes current relevance; requires present perfect here	l1-interference l1-spanish
I have already eaten breakfast.	Present Perfect	perfective	HAVE V-ed	Recent completion, current relevance	L1 trap: Spanish "He comido" (present perfect) can work, but learners overgeneralize to past time	Spanish perfect aspect can carry distant-past meaning; English requires recency	l1-interference l1-spanish
They have been waiting for two hours.	Present Perfect Continuous	perfective	HAVE BEEN V-ing	Ongoing duration	L1 trap: Spanish speakers use "Están esperando" (present continuous) and lose duration element	Spanish lack of perfect aspect in progressive; requires explicit duration marking in English	l1-interference l1-spanish
He had already left when we arrived.	Past Perfect Simple	perfective	HAD V-ed	Earlier action before past moment	L1 trap: Spanish "Había salido" works, but learners often drop "had" and use plain past	Spanish past perfect form is less emphasized; English requires explicit marking	l1-interference l1-spanish
We have lived here since my childhood.	Present Perfect Continuous	perfective	HAVE V-ed	State from past origin to now	L1 trap: Spanish "Vivimos" (present simple) misses the perfective spanning aspect	Spanish present simple conflates ongoing state and completed action; English distinguishes	l1-interference l1-spanish
She ate breakfast at the hotel yesterday morning.	Past Simple	simple	subject + V-ed	completed past action with explicit time marker (yesterday)	yesterday; ate (not 'has eaten')	Not Present Perfect: French speakers calque the passé composé and produce 'has eaten yesterday' — English forbids present perfect with definite past time.	l1-interference l1-french past-simple-vs-present-perfect
I went to Paris last month for a conference.	Past Simple	simple	subject + V-ed + past time expression	completed past action with definite time (last month)	last month; went (not 'have gone')	Not Present Perfect: 'last month' is finished past time, so present perfect is impossible — French passé composé is misleading here.	l1-interference l1-french past-simple-vs-present-perfect
They had already eaten by the time we arrived at the restaurant.	Past Perfect Simple	perfective	had + past participle + by-the-time + past simple	earlier of two past events (the eating happens before the arriving)	had eaten; by the time we arrived	Not Past Simple for both: French uses passé composé for both events; English explicitly marks the earlier event with past perfect.	l1-interference l1-french past-perfect-vs-past-simple
I'm leaving tomorrow on the early flight to Lyon.	Present Continuous for Future Arrangement	progressive	be + V-ing + future time	fixed personal arrangement (ticket booked)	tomorrow; 'm leaving	Not 'will leave': French 'aller + inf' calques to 'going to', but for booked plans English prefers present continuous over both 'will' and 'going to'.	l1-interference l1-french present-continuous-future
I saw her at the conference yesterday.	Past Simple	simple	subject + V-ed + past time expression	completed past action at a defined past time	yesterday; saw	Not Present Perfect: German Perfekt 'habe gesehen' is the spoken default for past, but English requires past simple with 'yesterday'.	l1-interference l1-german past-simple-vs-present-perfect
We've just arrived at the hotel — the rooms aren't ready yet.	Present Perfect	perfective	have/has + past participle	recent completion with current relevance (we are here now)	've just arrived; rooms aren't ready	Not Past Simple: arrival has present consequences, so present perfect is required; German Perfekt aligns here, but learners often drop the auxiliary.	l1-interference l1-german present-perfect-relevance
They had already eaten dinner when the guests finally arrived.	Past Perfect Simple	perfective	had + past participle + when + past simple	earlier past event before another past event	had already eaten; when … arrived	Not Past Simple: German verb-final order ('hatten … gegessen') reorders to 'had eaten' in English; word order shifts from SOV to SVO.	l1-interference l1-german past-perfect-vs-past-simple
He's going to come over tomorrow to help us move the furniture.	Be Going To	intentional	be + going to + base verb	pre-decided plan or intention	tomorrow; 's going to come	Not 'will come': German 'wird kommen' calques to bare 'will', but English prefers 'going to' when the plan is already arranged.	l1-interference l1-german future-going-to-vs-will
You will have finished the report by the time the meeting starts.	Future Perfect Simple	perfective	will + have + past participle + by/by-the-time	completion before a future reference point	will have finished; by the time	Not Future Simple: German 'wirst getan haben' requires the auxiliary chain 'will have + past participle' in English, in fixed order.	l1-interference l1-german future-perfect
I've been reading this novel since this morning and I still can't put it down.	Present Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	have/has been + V-ing + since/for	ongoing action started in the past, continuing now	since this morning; 've been reading	Not Present Continuous: Russian uses bare present for ongoing duration, but English requires present perfect continuous with 'since/for'.	l1-interference l1-russian present-perfect-continuous-vs-present-continuous
She lives in Moscow and commutes to Saint Petersburg every weekend.	Present Simple	simple	subject + base verb (3rd p sg + -s)	permanent state or general fact	lives; every weekend	Not Present Continuous: Russian present is aspect-neutral, so learners may pick continuous; permanent residence requires present simple.	l1-interference l1-russian present-simple-vs-present-continuous
I've already written the letter — it's on your desk.	Present Perfect	perfective	have/has + past participle + already	completed action with present relevance ('already' + result visible now)	've already written; on your desk	Not Past Simple: Russian imperfective past 'писал' looks like progressive, but the English equivalent is present perfect because of present relevance.	l1-interference l1-russian present-perfect-vs-past-simple
He was a student at the university when we first met.	Past Simple	simple	subject + was/were + a/an + noun + when-clause	previous state at a defined past time	was a student; when we first met	Not 'was student': Russian allows zero copula and no article in predicate nouns; English requires 'a/an'.	l1-interference l1-russian past-simple article-error
They arrived yesterday on the late train from Kiev.	Past Simple	simple	subject + V-ed + past time expression	completed action at a definite past time	yesterday; arrived	Not Present Perfect: Russian perfective past 'приехали' marks completion; English uses simple past with 'yesterday'.	l1-interference l1-russian past-simple-vs-present-perfect
We were leaving the office at six o'clock when the fire alarm went off.	Past Continuous	progressive	was/were + V-ing + when + past simple	action ongoing at a specific past time, interrupted	at six o'clock; were leaving; when … went off	Not Past Simple: Russian imperfective 'уходили' marks duration; English requires past continuous to frame an ongoing action.	l1-interference l1-russian past-continuous-vs-past-simple
I went to the store yesterday to pick up the package.	Past Simple	simple	subject + V-ed + past time expression	completed past action at a definite past time	yesterday; went	Not bare verb 'go yesterday': Mandarin marks completion with the particle 了 and no tense; English requires the past form 'went'.	l1-interference l1-mandarin past-simple
He has already had dinner, so he won't be eating with us.	Present Perfect	perfective	have/has + already + past participle	completed action with current relevance	has already had; so he won't be eating	Not Past Simple: Mandarin 已经…了 maps to English present perfect ('already + have + V-ed'); learners often drop 'have'.	l1-interference l1-mandarin present-perfect-already
She works in Beijing for an international consultancy.	Present Simple	simple	subject + base verb (3rd p sg + -s)	permanent fact or job	works; for an international consultancy	Not Present Continuous: Mandarin 在 may suggest progressive to learners, but a permanent job uses present simple, not 'is working'.	l1-interference l1-mandarin present-simple-vs-present-continuous
I'm reading a book right now — can I call you back in ten minutes?	Present Continuous	progressive	am/is/are + V-ing + right now	action in progress at the moment of speaking	right now; 'm reading	Not Present Simple: Mandarin 正在 explicitly marks progressive; English requires the auxiliary 'be' + V-ing — learners often produce bare 'I read now'.	l1-interference l1-mandarin present-continuous
I drink coffee every morning before I leave for work.	Present Simple	simple	subject + base verb + frequency expression	habit or routine	every morning; drink	Not Present Continuous: Mandarin uses the bare verb for habits; English also uses bare verb but requires the -s on 3rd person singular, which learners drop.	l1-interference l1-mandarin present-simple subject-verb-agreement
They moved house three years ago when his parents retired.	Past Simple	simple	subject + V-ed + … ago	completed action at a definite past time (… ago)	three years ago; moved	Not Present Perfect: '… ago' is incompatible with present perfect in English, although Mandarin 了 may suggest the perfect to learners.	l1-interference l1-mandarin past-simple-with-ago
I eat rice every day for breakfast and lunch.	Present Simple	simple	subject + base verb + frequency expression	habitual action	every day; eat	Not Future Simple: Japanese -masu form covers habitual, future, and general truth; English uses present simple only for habits — never for tomorrow's plans.	l1-interference l1-japanese present-simple
He is eating his lunch in the cafeteria right now.	Present Continuous	progressive	is/are + V-ing + right now	action in progress at the moment of speaking	right now; is eating	Not Present Perfect: Japanese ている can mean either ongoing or resultative state; English -ing marks only the ongoing action.	l1-interference l1-japanese present-continuous-vs-present-perfect
I have lived here for three years and I'm planning to stay longer.	Present Perfect	perfective	have/has + past participle + for + duration	state from past origin to present	for three years; have lived	Not Present Continuous: Japanese ている for duration should map to English present perfect (or perfect continuous) — never bare present.	l1-interference l1-japanese present-perfect-for-since
Mr. Tanaka came to the office yesterday for the quarterly review.	Past Simple	simple	subject + V-ed + past time expression	completed past action at a definite past time	yesterday; came	Not Present Perfect: Japanese -mashita is past tense, but learners may calque the polite ました with English perfect; 'yesterday' forbids perfect.	l1-interference l1-japanese past-simple-vs-present-perfect
My older brother had already left for the station before I woke up.	Past Perfect Simple	perfective	had + past participle + before + past simple	earlier past event preceding another past event	had already left; before I woke up	Not Past Simple: Japanese stacks aspect markers (-te-ita); English uses had + past participle to mark relative past.	l1-interference l1-japanese past-perfect-vs-past-simple
I'm going to the conference next week to give the keynote.	Present Continuous for Future Arrangement	progressive	be + V-ing + future time	fixed personal arrangement (registered, scheduled)	next week; 'm going	Not Present Simple: Japanese -masu form covers future, but English requires either 'be going to', 'will', or present continuous for arrangements.	l1-interference l1-japanese present-continuous-future
The office is being renovated by contractors.	Present Continuous Passive	progressive	be + being + past participle	describing work in progress	right now	vs present simple	passive-present-continuous recognition
The house was being painted when we arrived.	Past Continuous Passive	progressive	was/were + being + past participle	interrupted past action	during that time	vs past simple	passive-past-continuous recognition
The bridge had been closed before traffic increased.	Past Perfect Passive	perfective	had + been + past participle	completed before another past event	already done	vs past simple	passive-past-perfect recognition
The contract will be signed by the director.	Future Simple Passive	simple	will + be + past participle	planned future action	next week	vs present passive	passive-future recognition
The project will have been completed by June.	Future Perfect Passive	perfective	will + have + been + past participle	finished by a future time	by then	vs future simple	passive-future-perfect recognition
The decision would be accepted by everyone.	Conditional Passive (Second)	simple	would + be + past participle	hypothetical present	if we proposed it	vs active conditional	passive-conditional recognition
The mistake would have been prevented if we had checked.	Conditional Perfect Passive (Third)	perfective	would + have + been + past participle	hypothetical past	if we had been careful	vs past simple	passive-conditional recognition
His car got damaged in the accident.	Get-Passive	simple	get + past participle	change of state or adverse event	suddenly happened	vs be-passive	passive-get recognition
Her dress got torn while dancing.	Get-Passive (Past)	simple	got + past participle	past change of state	something bad occurred	vs was torn	passive-get recognition
The window has gotten broken by the storm.	Get-Passive (Perfect)	perfective	have + gotten + past participle	completed change affecting now	recently happened	vs has been broken	passive-get recognition
I had my hair cut by the stylist.	Causative Have	simple	have + object + past participle	arrange for someone else to do it	I arranged it	vs causative get	passive-causative-have recognition
She got her essay checked by her teacher.	Causative Get	simple	get + object + past participle	arrange or manipulate to get done	informal arrangement	vs causative have	passive-causative-get recognition
The wood needs painting before winter.	Need + Gerund Passive	simple	need + gerund	thing itself requires action	maintenance needed	vs need + infinitive	passive-need-gerund recognition
The system needs to be updated regularly.	Infinitive Passive	simple	to + be + past participle	required action on object	formal necessity	vs gerund	passive-infinitive recognition
Being praised by colleagues boosted her confidence.	Gerund Passive	simple	being + past participle	gerund form of passive	abstract concept	vs past participle	passive-gerund recognition
The package might be delivered tomorrow.	Modal Passive	modal	modal + be + past participle	possibility or permission	uncertain timing	vs active modal	passive-modal recognition
Had I known about the deadline, I would have submitted it.	Inverted Conditional (Second)	simple	had + subject + past participle	imagining alternative past	swap had/would	vs standard second	inverted-conditional conditional-third recognition
Were you in my position, what would you do?	Inverted Conditional (Second)	simple	were + subject	formal hypothetical present	if you were	vs standard form	inverted-conditional conditional-second recognition
Should you need any assistance, just call me.	Conditional (Polite Request)	simple	should + subject	politeness or formal offer	if you need	vs standard	inverted-conditional recognition
Unless you pay now, we will cancel your order.	Unless + First Conditional	simple	unless + condition	negative condition	if you don't pay	vs standard if	unless conditional-first recognition
Provided that you submit the application on time, you will be eligible.	Provided That (Conditional)	simple	provided that + condition	formal agreement	if you do	vs as long as	provided-that conditional-first recognition
In case it rains, bring an umbrella.	Time Clause (Future)	simple	in case + clause	precaution against possibility	if it happens	vs provided that	in-case time-clause recognition
But for your help, I would have failed the exam.	Conditional (Polite Request)	perfective	but for + noun	without you, opposite would happen	if you hadn't helped	vs conditional	but-for conditional-third recognition
One more word and I leave!	Implicit Conditional (Imperative + And)	simple	imperative + and + consequence	unspoken condition	if you say more	vs explicit	implicit-conditional recognition
Swimming builds muscle and confidence.	Gerund (Subject)	simple	gerund + verb	abstract activity as topic	-ing form at start	vs infinitive subject	non-finite gerund recognition
After graduating, she moved to Berlin.	Gerund (After Verb)	simple	preposition + gerund	activity following another	after -ing	vs infinitive	non-finite gerund recognition
I want to explore new ideas.	Infinitive (After Verb)	simple	verb + to + infinitive	desired action or goal	to + base verb	vs gerund	non-finite infinitive recognition
He went to Paris to study art.	Infinitive of Purpose	simple	verb + to + infinitive (why)	explanation of intention	in order to	vs gerund	non-finite infinitive-of-purpose recognition
You must help carry the boxes.	Bare Infinitive (Modal)	modal	modal + base verb	necessity or permission	no to	vs full infinitive	non-finite bare-infinitive recognition
Let the children play outside.	Bare Infinitive (Let/Make)	simple	let/make + object + base verb	allowing or forcing	no to after object	vs full infinitive	non-finite bare-infinitive recognition
Can you help me fix this?	Bare Infinitive (Help)	modal	help + (to) + base verb	assistance with action	optional to	vs full infinitive	non-finite bare-infinitive recognition
She seems to have known the answer already.	Perfect Infinitive	perfective	to + have + past participle	completed action before main verb	before the present	vs simple infinitive	non-finite perfect-infinitive recognition
She enjoys reading historical novels in the evening.	Gerund (After Verb)	simple	verb + gerund	verbs of liking/preference take gerund	enjoy/love/hate/mind + -ing	vs infinitive	non-finite gerund recognition
He admitted breaking the window during the argument.	Gerund (After Verb)	simple	admit + gerund	verbs of acknowledgement take gerund	admit/deny/avoid/suggest + -ing	vs infinitive (wrong)	non-finite gerund recognition
I look forward to meeting you next week.	Gerund (After Preposition)	simple	preposition + gerund	gerund mandatory after prepositions including phrasal 'to'	to here is preposition, not infinitive	vs infinitive after to	non-finite gerund recognition
Smoking is prohibited inside the building.	Gerund (Subject)	simple	gerund + verb	gerund as subject conveys the activity itself	-ing form opens the sentence	vs to + infinitive subject	non-finite gerund recognition
She decided to take a year off after graduation.	Infinitive (After Verb)	simple	verb + to + infinitive	verbs of decision/intention take infinitive	decide/promise/agree/refuse + to	vs gerund (wrong)	non-finite infinitive recognition
It is essential to read the instructions carefully.	Infinitive (After Adjective)	simple	it is + adjective + to	infinitive after evaluative adjectives	easy/hard/important/essential + to	vs gerund	non-finite infinitive recognition
He is too tired to continue the meeting.	Infinitive (After Too/Enough)	simple	too + adjective + to	excess preventing the action	too + adj/adv + to	vs so...that	non-finite infinitive recognition
She is old enough to vote in the election.	Infinitive (After Too/Enough)	simple	adjective + enough + to	sufficient degree to enable the action	enough + to	vs too...to	non-finite infinitive recognition
Having finished her assignment, she went out with friends.	Perfect Participle	perfective	having + past participle	prior completed action before main verb	having + done	vs simple participle	non-finite perfect-participle recognition
He regretted having lied to his colleagues about the report.	Perfect Gerund	perfective	having + past participle	gerund form marking prior completion	regret/admit/deny + having done	vs simple gerund	non-finite perfect-gerund recognition
The thief is believed to have escaped through the back door.	Perfect Infinitive	perfective	to + have + past participle	completed action before reporting verb	is said/believed/thought to have	vs simple infinitive	non-finite perfect-infinitive recognition
Walking through the park, I noticed how beautiful the autumn was.	Present Participle (Adverbial)	progressive	-ing clause + main clause	simultaneous action providing context	-ing clause at start	vs perfect participle	non-finite participle recognition
The new bridge is being inspected by structural engineers this week.	Present Continuous Passive	progressive	is/are being + past participle	process underway right now	this week; is being inspected	Not present simple passive: action is in progress, not a regular procedure.	passive passive-present-continuous core recognition
Three more witnesses are being interviewed by the police as we speak.	Present Continuous Passive	progressive	is/are being + past participle	ongoing process at the moment of speaking	as we speak; are being interviewed	Not present perfect passive: focus is on the action in progress, not on completion.	passive passive-present-continuous core recognition
The patient is being prepped for surgery in the operating theatre.	Present Continuous Passive	progressive	is/are being + past participle	temporary action in progress	in the operating theatre; is being prepped	Not get-passive: institutional context favours be-passive over get-passive.	passive passive-present-continuous core recognition
The contract is being renegotiated by both legal teams this morning.	Present Continuous Passive	progressive	is/are being + past participle	ongoing professional process	this morning; is being renegotiated	Not present simple passive: in-progress, not habitual.	passive passive-present-continuous core recognition
The damaged roof was being repaired when the storm returned.	Past Continuous Passive	progressive	was/were being + past participle + when-clause	action in progress in the past, interrupted	when the storm returned; was being repaired	Not past simple passive: emphasises duration interrupted by another past event.	passive passive-past-continuous core recognition
Dinner was being served when the fire alarm went off.	Past Continuous Passive	progressive	was/were being + past participle + when-clause	ongoing past action interrupted	when the fire alarm went off; was being served	Not past simple passive: continuous action framed by an interruption.	passive passive-past-continuous core recognition
The proposal was being discussed when the chairperson left the room.	Past Continuous Passive	progressive	was/were being + past participle + when-clause	in-progress meeting action	when the chairperson left; was being discussed	Not past perfect passive: discussion was current, not earlier.	passive passive-past-continuous core recognition
By midnight, all the evidence had been collected by the forensic team.	Past Perfect Passive	perfective	had been + past participle + by-time	completion before another past time	by midnight; had been collected	Not past simple passive: explicitly earlier than another past reference.	passive passive-past-perfect core recognition
Every door had been locked before the security guard left for the night.	Past Perfect Passive	perfective	had been + past participle + before-clause	earlier completion before another past event	before the security guard left; had been locked	Not past simple passive: order of events requires past perfect.	passive passive-past-perfect core recognition
The decision had been made long before the meeting was even scheduled.	Past Perfect Passive	perfective	had been + past participle + long before	earlier-than-past completion	long before the meeting was scheduled; had been made	Not present perfect passive: anchored to a past reference, not now.	passive passive-past-perfect core recognition
She let her younger brother borrow the car for the weekend.	Bare Infinitive (Let/Make)	simple	let + object + bare infinitive	permission given without choice marker	let … borrow	Not infinitive: let/make/have take bare infinitive, not 'to'.	non-finite bare-infinitive recognition
Heavy traffic made us miss our connecting flight to Berlin.	Bare Infinitive (Let/Make)	simple	make + object + bare infinitive	external compulsion or causation	made us miss	Not 'made us to miss': make + bare infinitive, never 'to'.	non-finite bare-infinitive recognition
We watched the technician install the new server rack from start to finish.	Bare Infinitive (Help)	simple	perception verb + object + bare infinitive	complete event observed	watched … install	Not 'install-ing': bare infinitive emphasises the whole event; -ing emphasises duration.	non-finite bare-infinitive recognition
She moved to Vancouver to study marine biology at UBC.	Infinitive of Purpose	simple	main clause + to + base verb	reason or purpose for an action	moved … to study	Not 'for studying': purpose with infinitive, not 'for + gerund'.	non-finite infinitive infinitive-of-purpose recognition
He stayed late to finish the quarterly report before the deadline.	Infinitive of Purpose	simple	main clause + to + base verb	intention behind an action	stayed late … to finish	Not 'for finishing': purpose adverbial uses infinitive, not gerund.	non-finite infinitive infinitive-of-purpose recognition
We use this software to track customer support tickets across teams.	Infinitive of Purpose	simple	main clause + to + base verb	functional purpose of a tool	use … to track	Not 'for tracking': purpose-of-use prefers infinitive in formal English.	non-finite infinitive infinitive-of-purpose recognition
She apologised for having missed the previous two team meetings.	Perfect Gerund	perfective	having + past participle	gerund marking action prior to the moment of apology	apologised for having missed	Not simple gerund: perfect gerund explicitly anchors the action in the past relative to the matrix verb.	non-finite perfect-gerund recognition
The candidate denied having received any briefing about the project.	Perfect Gerund	perfective	having + past participle	gerund of a prior, completed action	denied having received	Not simple gerund 'receiving': the receiving is finished and prior to the denial.	non-finite perfect-gerund recognition
He was praised for having organised the entire conference single-handedly.	Perfect Gerund	perfective	having + past participle	gerund of an earlier completed achievement	for having organised	Not simple gerund: emphasises that the organising is fully finished.	non-finite perfect-gerund recognition
One more interruption and I'll lose my temper completely.	Implicit Conditional (Coordination)	first	noun phrase + and + will-clause	coordinated implicit if-clause (if + condition, then result)	one more interruption and …	Not literal coordination: 'and' here means 'and as a result'; equivalent to 'if there is one more interruption'.	implicit-conditional conditional-first conditional recognition
Hurry up or you'll miss the last train home.	Implicit Conditional (Coordination)	first	imperative + or + will-clause	imperative as implicit if-clause (if you don't…, then…)	hurry up or you'll miss	Not simple disjunction: 'or' encodes negative condition.	implicit-conditional conditional-first conditional recognition
One more late submission and the project will be cancelled outright.	Implicit Conditional (Coordination)	first	noun phrase + and + will-clause	implicit threat or warning	one more late submission and …	Not literal 'and': functions as 'if there is one more late submission'.	implicit-conditional conditional-first conditional recognition
At this hour next week, I'd be lying on a beach in Greece.	Conditional Continuous	second	would + be + V-ing	hypothetical action in progress at a future point	at this hour next week; 'd be lying	Not conditional simple: continuous emphasises the activity in progress, not a punctual event.	conditional conditional-continuous recognition
If she weren't so busy, she'd be writing her novel right now.	Conditional Continuous	second	if + were + …, would + be + V-ing	hypothetical activity ongoing at the present moment	right now; 'd be writing	Not conditional simple: stress on the activity unfolding, not the bare event.	conditional conditional-continuous recognition
With more funding, the team would be running clinical trials by now.	Conditional Continuous	second	prep phrase + would + be + V-ing	counterfactual ongoing activity in present	by now; would be running	Not future continuous: counterfactual present, not real future.	conditional conditional-continuous recognition
By next month, she would have been working at the firm for ten full years.	Conditional Perfect Continuous	third	would + have been + V-ing + for-duration	hypothetical duration up to a future-past reference	by next month; for ten full years	Not conditional perfect: continuous stresses ongoing duration up to that point.	conditional conditional-perfect-continuous recognition
If the rain hadn't started, we'd have been hiking in the mountains all afternoon.	Conditional Perfect Continuous	third	if + had + V-ed, would have been + V-ing	counterfactual ongoing past activity	all afternoon; 'd have been hiking	Not conditional perfect: continuous emphasises the ongoing nature of the past activity.	conditional conditional-perfect-continuous recognition
She would have been studying medicine if her family had supported her decision.	Conditional Perfect Continuous	third	would have been + V-ing + if-clause	hypothetical past-extending activity	would have been studying; if her family had supported	Not conditional perfect: stresses sustained activity over a period.	conditional conditional-perfect-continuous recognition
We are going to launch the new product line in early September.	Be Going To	intentional	be + going to + base verb	pre-decided plan or intention	in early September; are going to launch	Not 'will launch': decision is already made, not spontaneous.	future-going-to future recognition
Look at those clouds — it's going to pour any minute now.	Be Going To	intentional	be + going to + base verb	prediction based on present evidence	look at those clouds; 's going to pour	Not 'will pour': evidence-based prediction prefers 'going to'.	future-going-to future recognition
He's going to retire as soon as his pension matures next year.	Be Going To	intentional	be + going to + base verb	pre-decided personal plan	as soon as; 's going to retire	Not 'is retiring': fixed plan around an event, not a confirmed timetable.	future-going-to future recognition
She has been studying Japanese for three years and now reads novels easily.	Present Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	have/has been + V-ing + for-duration	ongoing duration with present result	for three years; has been studying	Not present perfect simple: continuous stresses the activity, not the result count.	present-perfect-continuous core recognition
They have been negotiating the merger since early March.	Present Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	have/has been + V-ing + since	long-running activity continuing now	since early March; have been negotiating	Not past continuous: continues into the present.	present-perfect-continuous core recognition
I've been waiting at the bus stop for over forty minutes already.	Present Perfect Continuous	perfect-progressive	have/has been + V-ing + for-duration	ongoing wait with current frustration	for over forty minutes; 've been waiting	Not present continuous: emphasises duration leading up to now.	present-perfect-continuous core recognition
We were driving along the coast when we spotted the whales offshore.	Past Continuous	progressive	was/were + V-ing + when + past simple	background action interrupted	when we spotted; were driving	Not past simple: continuous frames a longer action interrupted by a punctual one.	past-continuous core recognition
She was preparing dinner while her partner was setting the table.	Past Continuous	progressive	was/were + V-ing + while + was/were + V-ing	two parallel ongoing past actions	while; was preparing; was setting	Not past simple: simultaneous duration uses parallel past continuous.	past-continuous core recognition
At 9 p.m. last Friday, I was finishing my essay in the library.	Past Continuous	progressive	was/were + V-ing + at + past time	action in progress at a specific past time	at 9 p.m. last Friday; was finishing	Not past simple: continuous required for ongoing action at a precise past moment.	past-continuous core recognition
If you turn left at the lights, the museum is on your right.	Zero Conditional	zero	if + present simple, present simple	general truth or instruction	if you turn left; is on your right	Not first conditional: real instruction, not a future prediction.	conditional-zero conditional recognition
Water freezes if you cool it below zero degrees Celsius.	Zero Conditional	zero	if + present simple, present simple	general truth	if you cool it below zero; freezes	Not first conditional: scientific fact, not a one-off future event.	conditional-zero conditional recognition
I love French cinema. — So do I, especially the New Wave directors.	Auxiliary Ellipsis (So + Aux + Subject)	simple	So + auxiliary/do + subject	agreeing affirmatively with the previous statement	So do I	Not 'So I love': inversion of auxiliary and subject is obligatory in agreement.	auxiliary-ellipsis discourse politeness recognition
She has been to Tokyo three times. — So has my brother.	Auxiliary Ellipsis (So + Aux + Subject)	simple	So + auxiliary + subject	agreement using the same auxiliary as in the original	So has my brother	Not 'So my brother does': must echo the original auxiliary (has).	auxiliary-ellipsis discourse recognition
I won't be attending the gala. — Neither will my colleagues.	Auxiliary Ellipsis (Neither/Nor + Aux + Subject)	simple	Neither/Nor + auxiliary + subject	agreement with a negative statement	Neither will	Not 'Neither my colleagues will': inversion of auxiliary required.	auxiliary-ellipsis discourse recognition
He doesn't drink coffee. — Nor do I, actually.	Auxiliary Ellipsis (Neither/Nor + Aux + Subject)	simple	Nor + auxiliary + subject	negative agreement in formal register	Nor do I	Not 'Nor I do': nor triggers subject-aux inversion.	auxiliary-ellipsis discourse register-formal recognition
Did you enjoy the play? — I did, very much.	Auxiliary Ellipsis (Short Reply)	simple	subject + auxiliary (no main verb)	short answer using the auxiliary alone	I did (no main verb)	Not 'I enjoyed': in spoken English, the auxiliary alone is preferred to avoid repetition.	auxiliary-ellipsis discourse recognition
You're coming to the wedding, aren't you?	Tag Question (Positive Statement)	simple	positive statement + negative tag (auxiliary + n't + pronoun)	seeking confirmation of an assumption	You're coming, aren't you	Not 'are you': positive statement takes negative tag.	tag-question discourse recognition
She has finished the report, hasn't she?	Tag Question (Positive Statement)	simple	positive statement + negative tag	confirmation request based on shared knowledge	hasn't she	Not 'has she': polarity of tag flips relative to statement.	tag-question discourse recognition
He doesn't speak any German, does he?	Tag Question (Negative Statement)	simple	negative statement + positive tag	confirmation that the negative is correct	does he	Not 'doesn't he': negative statement requires positive tag.	tag-question discourse recognition
Open the window, will you?	Tag Question (Imperative)	simple	imperative + will/would/could you	softening a request or command	will you	Not 'do you': imperative tag uses 'will/would/could you', never 'do you'.	tag-question politeness discourse recognition
Hardly had we sat down when the fire alarm sounded across the entire building.	Negative Inversion (Hardly/Scarcely)	perfective	Hardly/Scarcely + had + subject + V-ed + when-clause	dramatic emphasis on near-simultaneous past events	Hardly had we sat down; when the fire alarm sounded	Not 'We had hardly sat down …': fronting the negative adverbial triggers subject-aux inversion.	negative-inversion discourse register-formal recognition
Not only did she finish the marathon, but she also broke her personal record.	Negative Inversion (Not Only)	simple	Not only + auxiliary + subject + base verb, but … also	emphatic addition of a second remarkable fact	Not only did she finish; but … also	Not 'Not only she finished': fronted negative adverbial requires inversion.	negative-inversion discourse recognition
Never have I seen such a chaotic city council meeting in my life.	Negative Inversion (Never/Seldom/Rarely)	perfective	Never/Seldom/Rarely + auxiliary + subject + past participle	emphatic statement about a unique experience	Never have I seen	Not 'I have never seen' (neutral): fronting 'never' requires inversion for emphasis.	negative-inversion discourse register-formal recognition
No sooner had the meeting begun than the CEO announced his resignation.	Negative Inversion (No Sooner)	perfective	No sooner + had + subject + V-ed + than-clause	immediate sequence of two past events	No sooner had … than	Not 'when': 'no sooner' is paired with 'than', not 'when'.	negative-inversion discourse register-formal recognition
Only after the storm had passed did the rescue teams resume their search.	Negative Inversion (Only After/When)	simple	Only after/when + clause + auxiliary + subject + base verb	emphasis on the precise condition that triggered an event	Only after the storm had passed did the rescue teams resume	Not 'Only after the storm had passed the rescue teams resumed': fronted 'only' triggers inversion.	negative-inversion discourse recognition
Had I known about the strike, I would have taken the earlier flight.	Inverted Conditional (Third)	third	Had + subject + past participle, would have + past participle	formal counterfactual past	Had I known; I would have taken	Not 'If I had known': inverted form drops 'if' and inverts had + subject; more formal.	inverted-conditional conditional-third register-formal recognition
Were she more experienced, the committee would offer her the directorship.	Inverted Conditional (Second)	second	Were + subject + complement, would + base verb	formal counterfactual present	Were she more experienced; would offer	Not 'If she were': inversion preferred in formal/written English.	inverted-conditional conditional-second register-formal recognition
Should you require any further assistance, please contact our help desk.	Inverted Conditional (Should — First)	first	Should + subject + base verb, imperative/will-clause	formal polite future condition	Should you require; please contact	Not 'If you require': 'should' fronting is the formal polite alternative.	inverted-conditional conditional-first register-formal recognition
She seems to have forgotten about our scheduled meeting this afternoon.	Raising Verb (Seem/Appear)	perfective	subject + seem/appear + to + perfect infinitive	speaker's inference about the subject's likely state	seems to have forgotten	Not control verb: 'seem' has no semantic agent — 'she' raises from the lower clause.	raising-verb non-finite recognition
The negotiations appear to be making some real progress at last.	Raising Verb (Seem/Appear)	progressive	subject + appear + to + be + V-ing	cautious observation about an ongoing process	appear to be making	Not control verb: subject is raised, not chosen by 'appear'.	raising-verb non-finite recognition
She managed to convince the board to approve the new budget.	Control Verb (Want/Promise/Manage)	simple	subject + manage + to + base verb	subject's effort leading to a successful outcome	managed to convince	Not raising verb: 'she' is the agent of both 'managed' and 'convince'.	control-verb non-finite recognition
The interns were given a thorough orientation on their first morning.	Ditransitive Passive (Recipient Subject)	perfective	recipient + was/were + past participle + theme	passivisation putting the recipient in subject position	the interns were given … orientation	Not active 'gave the interns': passive promotes recipient (preferred when recipient is topical).	passive passive-dative ditransitive-passive recognition
A detailed report was sent to every member of the committee.	Ditransitive Passive (Theme Subject)	perfective	theme + was/were + past participle + to + recipient	passivisation putting the theme in subject position	a detailed report was sent	Not 'every member was sent a report': both are grammatical, but theme-subject foregrounds the report.	passive passive-dative ditransitive-passive recognition
The bookshelf collapsed under the weight of the encyclopaedias.	Ergative (Inchoative)	simple	subject + V-ed (intransitive use of typically transitive verb)	change of state with no overt agent	the bookshelf collapsed	Not passive: ergative looks active but there is no implied agent ('was collapsed' would be wrong here).	ergative discourse recognition
Vintage records sell quickly at the Saturday flea market.	Middle Voice (Generic)	simple	subject + V-s + manner adverbial	generic statement about how something tends to behave	sell quickly	Not passive 'are sold quickly': middle voice has active form but patient subject and a generic reading.	middle-voice discourse recognition
The man wearing the red scarf is our keynote speaker tonight.	Reduced Relative (Present Participle)	progressive	noun + V-ing phrase	reduced relative clause replacing 'who is V-ing'	the man wearing the red scarf	Not full relative: 'who is wearing' shortens to bare -ing modifier.	reduced-relative reduced-relative-present-participle non-finite recognition
The report submitted last Friday already contains the new figures.	Reduced Relative (Past Participle)	perfective	noun + past participle phrase	reduced relative replacing 'which was/were V-ed'	the report submitted last Friday	Not full relative: 'which was submitted' shortens to bare past-participle modifier.	reduced-relative reduced-relative-past-participle non-finite recognition
The treaty is expected to be signed by the end of this month.	Double Passive (be + V-ed + to be + V-ed)	perfective	subject + be + reporting V-ed + to be + main V-ed	chained passive: matrix passive plus passive infinitive	is expected to be signed	Not single passive: two passive layers — one for the reporting verb, one for the action.	passive double-passive register-formal recognition
She had a long, hot shower after the gym session.	Light Verb (Have)	simple	have + a + noun (delexicalised)	delexical have collocating with a daily-routine noun	had a … shower	Not literal possession: 'have a shower' = 'shower' as a single act.	light-verb collocation discourse recognition
He took a deep breath before stepping onto the stage.	Light Verb (Take)	simple	take + a + noun (delexicalised)	delexical take introducing a brief act	took a deep breath	Not literal 'taking' the breath: delexical take is the standard collocation.	light-verb collocation discourse recognition
We made a decision to relocate the office to the city centre.	Light Verb (Make)	simple	make + a + noun (delexicalised)	delexical make for committed mental acts	made a decision	Not 'decided': 'make a decision' adds formality and weight.	light-verb collocation discourse recognition
You are to report to the security desk at 8 a.m. tomorrow morning.	Be + To-Infinitive (Formal Future)	intentional	subject + be + to + base verb	formal scheduled or required future event	are to report; at 8 a.m. tomorrow	Not 'will report': be + to-infinitive carries an institutional or official tone.	be-to-infinitive register-formal recognition
The President is to address the nation this evening at nine.	Be + To-Infinitive (Formal Future)	intentional	subject + be + to + base verb	scheduled official event	is to address; this evening	Not 'is going to address': be + to-infinitive is the news-headline / official register form.	be-to-infinitive register-formal recognition
Shall we take a short break before the next session begins?	Shall (Suggestion)	simple	Shall + we + base verb	first-person suggestion or proposal	Shall we	Not 'Will we': 'shall we' is the suggestion form, especially in BrE.	shall shall-suggestion register-formal recognition
We shall overcome these challenges together as one nation.	Shall (Formal Future)	simple	subject + shall + base verb	emphatic or formal first-person future	we shall overcome	Not 'will': 'shall' carries solemn or formal weight.	shall register-formal recognition
She daren't say what she really thinks at the staff meetings.	Semi-Modal (Dare)	simple	subject + daren't + base verb	semi-modal expressing reluctance to act	daren't say	Not 'doesn't dare to say': bare semi-modal use takes negative contraction without 'to'.	semi-modal semi-modal-dare register-formal recognition
You needn't bring anything to the dinner — we have everything covered.	Semi-Modal (Need)	simple	subject + needn't + base verb	semi-modal expressing absence of necessity	needn't bring	Not 'don't need to bring' (also valid): bare 'needn't' is more emphatic and formal.	semi-modal semi-modal-need recognition
I'd rather you didn't mention the surprise in front of the children.	Modal (Would Rather)	simple	would rather + subject + past simple	speaker's preference about another person's behaviour	'd rather you didn't	Not present: would rather + different subject takes past simple for present meaning.	modal-would-rather-vs-sooner subjunctive recognition
He'd sooner resign than accept the demotion to a junior role.	Modal (Would Sooner)	simple	would sooner + base verb + than + base verb	strong preference between two alternatives	'd sooner resign than accept	Not 'would sooner to resign': bare infinitive after 'would sooner'.	modal-would-rather-vs-sooner recognition
Suppose your flight gets cancelled — what would you do then?	Suppose (Conditional Suggestion)	second	Suppose + present simple, would-clause	hypothetical scenario inviting reflection	Suppose your flight gets cancelled	Not 'if': 'suppose' opens a hypothetical without conjunction.	suppose conditional-second discourse recognition
Supposing she had taken the earlier train, she'd be here by now.	Supposing (Hypothetical)	third	Supposing + past perfect, would-clause	counterfactual scenario	Supposing she had taken; 'd be here	Not standard if-clause: 'supposing' is the same shape as 'if' but more conversational.	supposing conditional-third discourse recognition
You can use the conference room, providing you book it in advance.	Providing (Conditional)	first	main clause, providing + present simple	condition or proviso for permission	providing you book it	Not 'unless': 'providing' attaches a positive condition.	providing conditional conditional-first recognition
We'll proceed with the merger, on condition that the regulator approves.	On Condition That	first	main clause + on condition that + present simple	formal stipulated condition	on condition that the regulator approves	Not 'if': 'on condition that' is more formal and binding.	on-condition-that conditional register-formal recognition
Take an umbrella in case it rains during the ceremony tomorrow.	In Case (Precaution)	simple	imperative + in case + present simple	precaution against a possible event	in case it rains	Not 'if it rains': 'in case' triggers precautionary action before the event, not in response to it.	in-case time-clause recognition
The harder you train, the faster you'll recover from injuries.	Comparative Correlative (The …er, the …er)	simple	The + comparative + clause, the + comparative + clause	correlation between two changing degrees	The harder … the faster	Not literal: 'the' here functions as a correlative, not the article.	comparative-correlative discourse recognition
Even if she apologises, I won't be inviting her to the next party.	Even If (Hypothetical Concession)	first	Even if + present simple, will-clause	concession for a possible/hypothetical event	Even if she apologises	Not 'even though': 'even if' marks a hypothetical, not a fact.	even-if-vs-even-though conditional recognition
Even though she apologised, the team still felt let down.	Even Though (Real Concession)	simple	Even though + past simple, past simple	concession for a known fact	Even though she apologised	Not 'even if': 'even though' presents a real, known fact.	even-if-vs-even-though discourse recognition
He said he was going to call me back later that afternoon.	Future-in-the-Past (Was Going To)	intentional	was/were + going to + base verb	plan or intention viewed from a past moment	was going to call me back	Not 'is going to': from a past viewpoint, future plans backshift to 'was going to'.	future-in-past discourse recognition
She told me she would meet us at the gallery on Saturday.	Future-in-the-Past (Would)	intentional	subject + would + base verb (in past report)	predicted future from a past viewpoint	told me she would meet	Not 'will meet': reported context backshifts 'will' to 'would'.	future-in-past reported-speech recognition
We were just about to leave when the rain finally stopped.	Future-in-the-Past (Was About To)	intentional	was/were about to + base verb + when-clause	imminent past intention interrupted	were just about to leave; when the rain stopped	Not 'are about to': past viewpoint requires 'was/were about to'.	future-in-past recognition
When I walked into the office, my colleagues were celebrating because they had finally closed the deal.	Narrative Layering (Past Simple + Past Continuous + Past Perfect)	progressive	past simple + past continuous + past perfect	full narrative aspect coordination	walked; were celebrating; had closed	Not single-tense narration: three layers establish punctual moment, ongoing scene, and prior cause.	narrative-layering discourse recognition
She must have been working late again last night — her car was still in the lot at midnight.	Modal Perfect Continuous (Must Have Been V-ing)	perfect-progressive	must + have been + V-ing	confident inference about a past ongoing action	must have been working; at midnight	Not 'must have worked': continuous emphasises duration of the past activity.	modal-perfect-continuous modal-perfect modal recognition
You should have been studying for tomorrow's exam, not gaming all evening.	Modal Perfect Continuous (Should Have Been V-ing)	perfect-progressive	should + have been + V-ing	criticism of failure to engage in a past ongoing activity	should have been studying	Not 'should have studied': continuous form criticises absence of sustained effort.	modal-perfect-continuous modal recognition
They could have been waiting in the wrong terminal for hours.	Modal Perfect Continuous (Could Have Been V-ing)	perfect-progressive	could + have been + V-ing	hypothetical past ongoing activity	could have been waiting; for hours	Not 'could have waited': continuous frames sustained past activity.	modal-perfect-continuous modal recognition
Do you know whether the parcel has arrived yet?	Embedded Question (Yes/No)	perfective	main clause + whether/if + statement word order	indirect yes/no question without inversion	Do you know whether the parcel has arrived	Not 'has the parcel arrived': embedded clause keeps statement order.	embedded-question discourse recognition
Could you tell me where the nearest pharmacy is open today?	Embedded Question (Wh-)	simple	main clause + wh-word + statement word order	indirect wh-question for politeness	Could you tell me where the nearest pharmacy is	Not 'where is the nearest pharmacy': embedded clause drops inversion.	embedded-question politeness recognition
He admitted breaking the antique vase during the move.	Reporting Verb (Admit + V-ing)	simple	subject + admit + V-ing	reporting verb taking a gerund object	admitted breaking	Not 'admitted to break': admit takes -ing, not infinitive.	reporting-verb reported-speech recognition
She denied taking any documents from the office without permission.	Reporting Verb (Deny + V-ing)	simple	subject + deny + V-ing	reporting verb taking a gerund object	denied taking	Not 'denied to take': deny takes -ing, never infinitive.	reporting-verb reported-speech recognition
The committee suggested postponing the launch until the new fiscal year.	Reporting Verb (Suggest + V-ing)	simple	subject + suggest + V-ing	suggesting an action with gerund	suggested postponing	Not 'suggested to postpone': suggest never takes infinitive.	reporting-verb reported-speech recognition
The auditor accused the manager of falsifying the quarterly figures.	Reporting Verb (Accuse Of + V-ing)	simple	subject + accuse + object + of + V-ing	formal accusation pattern	accused … of falsifying	Not 'accused to falsify': accuse uses 'of + gerund'.	reporting-verb reported-speech recognition
She apologised for arriving so late to the budget meeting.	Reporting Verb (Apologise For + V-ing)	simple	subject + apologise + for + V-ing	expressing regret for a past action	apologised for arriving	Not 'apologised to arrive': apologise uses 'for + gerund'.	reporting-verb reported-speech recognition
He blamed his assistant for losing the client's signed contract.	Reporting Verb (Blame For + V-ing)	simple	subject + blame + object + for + V-ing	attributing fault for a specific action	blamed his assistant for losing	Not 'blamed to lose': blame uses 'for + gerund'.	reporting-verb reported-speech recognition
She promised to deliver the prototype by the end of the quarter.	Reporting Verb (Promise + To-Inf)	simple	subject + promise + to + base verb	commitment to a future action	promised to deliver	Not 'promised delivering': promise takes infinitive, not -ing.	reporting-verb reported-speech recognition
The witness refused to identify the suspect during the line-up.	Reporting Verb (Refuse + To-Inf)	simple	subject + refuse + to + base verb	stated unwillingness to perform an action	refused to identify	Not 'refused identifying': refuse takes infinitive only.	reporting-verb reported-speech recognition
The teacher reminded the class that water boils at 100 degrees Celsius.	Reported Speech (Universal Truth — No Backshift)	simple	reporting verb + that + present simple	no backshift because the embedded clause is a timeless truth	water boils at 100 degrees	Not 'water boiled': universal facts keep their original tense even after a past reporting verb.	reported-speech reported-no-backshift backshift recognition
She told us that if she had more time, she would learn Mandarin.	Reported Speech (Conditional 2/3 — No Backshift)	second	reporting verb + that + second/third conditional unchanged	conditionals 2 and 3 do not backshift further	if she had more time, she would learn	Not double-shift: 'had/would' already mark hypothetical, so no further shift.	reported-speech reported-no-backshift conditional-second recognition
I wish you would stop interrupting me whenever I'm trying to explain.	Wish (Annoyance — Would)	intentional	wish + subject + would + base verb	criticism of an irritating recurring behaviour	wish you would stop interrupting	Not 'wish you stopped' (regret): 'wish + would' targets behaviours the other person can change.	wish-annoyance wish wish-would subjunctive recognition
I wish it would stop raining before the wedding photos start.	Wish (Polite Request — Would)	intentional	wish + subject + would + base verb	indirect wish about an unchangeable subject's behaviour	wish it would stop raining	Not 'wish it stopped' (present unreal): 'wish + would' implies a desired change.	wish-would wish subjunctive recognition
I just got off the phone with him a few minutes ago.	Past Simple (American Variant)	simple	subject + V-ed + just + ago	informal AmE prefers past simple where BrE often uses present perfect	got off … a few minutes ago	Not present perfect: AmE freely combines past simple with 'just/already/yet'.	ame-vs-bre past-simple discourse recognition
I've just spoken to him about the contract.	Present Perfect (British Variant)	perfective	subject + have/has + just + past participle	BrE prefers present perfect with 'just/already/yet'	've just spoken	Not past simple in BrE: 'just/already/yet' triggers present perfect in standard British usage.	ame-vs-bre present-perfect register-formal recognition
Every summer, we would drive up to the lake for a long weekend.	Would (Habitual Past)	simple	subject + would + base verb + past time frame	repeated past habit (typically narrative)	Every summer; would drive	Not 'used to drive' (also valid but more general): 'would' fits when a past time frame is established.	habitual-would modal modal-past-habit recognition
She used to commute by train before she moved closer to the office.	Used To (Habitual Past)	simple	subject + used to + base verb	discontinued past habit or state	used to commute; before she moved	Not 'would commute': only 'used to' works for past states; 'would' is restricted to dynamic habits.	habitual-used-to modal modal-past-habit recognition
She talks as if she had been there herself, but she only read about it.	As If / As Though (Past Perfect — Counterfactual)	perfective	as if + past perfect	counterfactual comparison referring to a hypothetical past	as if she had been there	Not 'as if she was there' (past unreal present): past perfect adds counterfactual past depth.	as-if-counterfactual subjunctive recognition
It's high time you started taking your studies seriously.	It's High Time (Past Subjunctive)	simple	It's high time + subject + past simple	speaker says action is overdue	high time you started	Not 'It's high time you start': 'high time' takes past subjunctive form.	high-time subjunctive register-formal recognition
If it weren't for her quick thinking, the project would have collapsed entirely.	Cleft Conditional (If It Weren’t For)	third	If it weren't for + noun, would have + past participle	identifying a critical preventing factor	If it weren't for her quick thinking	Not third conditional: cleft variant foregrounds the responsible cause as a constituent.	cleft-conditional conditional-third discourse recognition
We had the leaking roof repaired by a professional contractor last week.	Causative Have (Service)	perfective	have + object + past participle	arranging a service performed by someone else	had the leaking roof repaired	Not active 'repaired the roof': causative makes clear someone else did the work.	passive-causative-have passive recognition
She finally got her thesis approved by the dissertation committee.	Causative Get (Result)	perfective	get + object + past participle	arranging or achieving a passive result, often informal	got her thesis approved	Not active 'approved her thesis': causative shifts focus to the result being secured.	passive-causative-get passive recognition
The drill sergeant made every recruit run five additional kilometres.	Causative Make (Compulsion)	simple	make + object + bare infinitive	compelling someone to act with no choice	made every recruit run	Not 'made … to run': make takes bare infinitive only in active voice.	causative-make non-finite recognition
Her parents let her travel to Iceland for her gap year.	Causative Let (Permission)	simple	let + object + bare infinitive	granting permission	let her travel	Not 'let her to travel': let takes only bare infinitive.	causative-let non-finite recognition
He helped his grandmother (to) plant the tomato seedlings in the garden.	Causative Help (Bare or To-Inf)	simple	help + object + (to) + base verb	help is the only verb where bare/to are interchangeable	helped … (to) plant	Not strict pattern: bare or 'to' is acceptable; bare is more common in informal English.	causative-help non-finite recognition
As soon as the report arrives, I'll forward it to the entire executive team.	Time Clause (Future)	simple	as soon as + present simple, will + base verb	immediate future action triggered by another future event	as soon as the report arrives; I'll forward	Not 'will arrive' in the time clause: time clauses use present, not future, after as soon as / when / before / after.	time-clause future recognition
Once you've finished the questionnaire, please return it to reception.	Time Clause (Future)	perfective	once + present perfect, imperative	completion of one future event triggers another	once you've finished; please return	Not 'once you will finish': time clauses cannot use 'will'.	time-clause future recognition
By the time we reach the summit, the sun will have risen above the clouds.	Time Clause (Future Perfect)	perfective	by the time + present simple, will have + past participle	one future event completed before another	by the time we reach; will have risen	Not 'will reach' in the time clause: present simple after 'by the time' for future meaning.	time-clause future-perfect recognition
After she had finished her presentation, the audience gave her a standing ovation.	Time Clause (Past Perfect)	perfective	after + past perfect, past simple	one past event clearly completed before another	after she had finished; gave	Not past simple in both: past perfect marks the earlier event explicitly.	time-clause past-perfect recognition
While the lasagna was baking, I tidied up the entire kitchen.	Time Clause (Past Continuous)	progressive	while + past continuous, past simple	one ongoing past action providing context for a punctual one	while the lasagna was baking; I tidied	Not 'while baked': 'while' frames duration, hence past continuous.	time-clause past-continuous recognition
Don't sign anything before you read the small print carefully.	Time Clause (Imperative + Before)	simple	imperative + before + present simple	caution against acting earlier than another event	before you read the small print	Not 'before you will read': 'before' takes present simple in time clauses.	time-clause recognition
Whenever I visit Lisbon, I always stay at the same little guesthouse.	Time Clause (Future)	simple	whenever + present simple, present simple	repeated action with each occurrence of another event	whenever I visit; I always stay	Not 'whenever I will visit': 'whenever' takes present simple.	time-clause recognition
The moment the lights dim, the orchestra will begin the overture.	Time Clause (Future)	simple	the moment + present simple, will + base verb	immediate trigger relationship	the moment the lights dim; will begin	Not 'will dim': 'the moment' is a temporal conjunction taking present simple.	time-clause future recognition
Until you apologise, I'm not going to speak to you again.	Time Clause (Future)	simple	until + present simple, going-to negative	endpoint of a future state	until you apologise; 'm not going to speak	Not 'until you will apologise': 'until' takes present simple for future meaning.	time-clause future recognition
The instant she heard the news, she burst into tears.	Time Clause (Past Continuous)	simple	the instant + past simple, past simple	immediate sequence of two past events	the instant she heard; burst into tears	Not past continuous: punctual immediate trigger uses past simple.	time-clause recognition
Just as we were locking the office, the alarm went off.	Time Clause (Past Continuous)	progressive	just as + past continuous, past simple	near-simultaneous past events	just as we were locking; the alarm went off	Not past simple for both: 'just as' frames an ongoing process interrupted.	time-clause past-continuous recognition
No matter when you arrive, dinner will be waiting on the table.	Time Clause (Future)	simple	no matter when + present simple, will + base verb	concession with temporal scope	no matter when you arrive; will be waiting	Not 'no matter when you will arrive': temporal subordinator takes present simple.	time-clause future recognition
